The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mariages d'aventure, by Émile Gaboriau

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Mariages d'aventure

Author: Émile Gaboriau

Release Date: July 11, 2014 [EBook #46253]

Language: French


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARIAGES D'AVENTURE ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)







WEDDINGS
ADVENTURE




PARIS.--PRINT. BY E. DONNAUD, RUE CASSETTE, 9.




WEDDINGS
ADVENTURE

BY

Emile Gaboriau

_Third Edition_

[Illustration: colofon]

PARIS
E. DENTU, EDITOR
_Library of the Society of Men of Letters_
PALAIS-ROYAL, 17 AND 19, ORLÉANS GALLERY

1873
All rights reserved


HAS
Ms GEORGES COINDREAU


_This fall, dear s[o]er, when we return from our runs in the mountains
des Eaux-Chaudes, I wrote this volume._

_I dedicate it to you--testimony of our unalterable affection._

Emile Gaboriau.




I

MR J.-D. FROM SAINT-ROCH

MARRIAGE AMBASSADOR




I


Why Pascal Divorne resigned less than a fortnight later
his graduation from the École des ponts-et-chaussées, of which he was one of the students
distinguished, we never really knew.

He didn't bother to explain it, and gave no reason,
maybe because he didn't have any good ones to give. I hear from
these admirable reasons, based on a certain interest and selfishness
careful, only admissible and conclusive for paying judges
patent.

However, there were plenty of opportunities for him to tell the truth or even
deny. All he had in Paris of distant relatives and
acquaintances, skilfully probed him. We thought we smelled something
secret, who knows, some little scandal-it was tempting. He had the
cruelty to deceive the expectation of these excellent curious people, who, for
interfere in the affairs of others, have the eternal and banal pretext
of a tender interest which they never had. He laughs in the face of these
obliging, always ready to open their hearts to a confidence, their
mouth to good advice, but which for nothing in the world would open their
scholarship if needed.

Some persisted. Those Pascal took aside, and everything
down, mysteriously, after throwing on all sides glances of
worried conspirator, he uttered this dirty word of politics, he who
his life had been occupied with politics. The means succeed him, the stubborn
fled full of terror, already thinking they saw each other ajar to
swallow them up the gates of Mont Saint-Michel.

Weary of the struggle, Pascal was left alone, but not without declaring that
he was an unsociable young man, who lacked frankness and whose
he was prudent to mistrust himself, especially as he had opinions by
too advanced.

The friends remained. He simply confessed to them, without details, that although
French and even a very good Frenchman, he had a horror of all kinds
of uniform, were it more embroidered than a reliquary, and than a use of the
government could not suit his character; random odds
wealth seemed to him preferable to a fixed salary,
big or small, won or not; finally, his independence seemed to him
more precious a thousand times than all the administrative honors, than a
portfolio of a minister even, were it of God the Father.

Naturally, his friends cared infinitely little about the hidden motive of
his actions; what did it matter to them whether he did one thing or another? They
declared in chorus that wisdom itself spoke through his mouth
and that he was unquestionably right.

Only one blamed the young engineer loudly, and in a paternal tone
reproached his imprudent haste. But it was Pascal's intimate,
his confidant, his friend from the college Henri IV. They had done their
studies together, and since then they were inseparable.

This faithful Achate transformed into a Mentor was called Eugène Lorilleux. He
was two or three years older than Pascal. Provided for eighteen
months of the degree of doctor of medicine, he painfully sought to
make a clientele.

He was still at the beginning, more difficult, more risky in
this career than in any other. He had clients, but
customers who paid badly or even did not pay. His patients lived
the upper floors, sad inhabitants of the garrets. He needed
climb eighty steps to sign a prescription. He had some
free consultations and paid consultations; but, as with
to each other it only came from the poor, it was really not
worth making a distinction.

But he was patient. He was waiting for this happy occasion which,
three times in life, it is said, passes within reach of every man and
it is a question of knowing how to grasp.

A hard worker, he relied on his science and his talent for
arrive at reputation and fortune. In what he was wrong and
still wrong today. He is learned, it is indisputable, but he
he lacks eye, coolness, audacity. Confident in himself
his cabinet, imperturbable in theory, he did not, near the bed of the
sick, this divinatory sense, this sudden inspiration which makes the
great, the true healers.

Lorilleux is no ordinary man, however. His great misfortune is
never to have known enthusiasm. He had neither adolescence nor
youth. He was born old. As you see it today, as it was
at fourteen, on the high school benches, when he was finishing his third year.
Nothing has changed in him: neither the size, nor the character.

He is a small, formal, solemn man. It exaggerates the seriousness, the
dignity and self-respect, to the point of sometimes seeming
ridiculous.

His insignificant figure is certainly not the mirror of his spirit, it is
a blank page where there is nothing to decipher. Sharper than a peasant
Norman, he has the weakness to assume that everyone has the same mania for
subtlety. He does not believe in indifferent actions, and always he
wants to discover a hidden purpose.

You will not make him understand that we often act spontaneously, without
meditated plan; he will invariably answer you: "--There is something
down there." His days are spent thwarting by skilful maneuvers
fantastic plots, or laboriously unraveling the imaginary thread
of some very complicated plot. These exaggerated fears, these
investigations are the misfortune of his life. Often his friends
laughed at these singular apprehensions. When they meet him again
preoccupied than usual:

--Well! Lorilleux, they ask him, have you found the little beast?

Finally, this calculator treats life as a series of problems
of algebra whose clever people always have the solution in their pocket.
For ten years, he has drawn up a rule of conduct which, he believes,
leaves nothing to chance, he has never deviated from it by one line.

Should we, after that, be surprised at his limited mind, his ideas
narrow? He is the living contrast of Pascal, who has ideas
wide, a certain audacity of design and great courage
initiative. So he reproaches him for being romantic.

The opposition of characters would suffice to explain the great friendship of the
two young people, but there was something more.

For a long time already the doctor had his sights on his friend, who does not care.
hardly doubted. It was from college.

Lorilleux had a sister ten years younger than him, whom he loved
with passion. Often, at the age when other teenagers only have
ideas of pleasure, he worried about this child. Their mother, Mrs.
Lorilleux, was a widow; a life annuity made up almost all of his
fortune and was to die with it. What would become of the girl
if his mother were to die? And even, setting aside this misfortune, what would be
his fate later? A young lady without a dowry rarely marries, and her
family, who were already struggling to make ends meet every
years, certainly could not give him any; his brother would not have had yet
enough time to amass one for her, when she reached her twenties.
Where to find her a husband?

These are the ideas that tormented this precocious calculator of seventeen
years, when he came to think that his friend Pascal would be later--in
ten years--an excellent match for this dear sister.

This idea seemed sublime to the provident schoolboy. He clung to it, she
never left him. By dint of turning it in all directions,
consider it from all sides, to calculate all the probabilities,
he came to regard it not only as admirable, as
necessary, but still like having to succeed with a little patience and
of skill.

"Fortune," he said to himself, "will not be an obstacle: the family of
Pascal is rich, and he is the most disinterested of men. My sister
will be pretty, modest, well brought up, she will make the happiness of her husband and
will be the best of mothers. It will certainly please
Pascal. Besides, if he does not marry her for the love of her, he
will marry him out of affection for me, his best friend, in order to tighten
the bonds of our friendship and to become my brother. So I ensure
happiness of two beings whom I cherish. All my actions must tend
towards this goal.

And that is why Lorilleux became and remained Pascal's intimate friend, why
he took such a tender interest in everything that touched him. He knew, at one
penny, the figure of the fortune which was to return to him one day,
and he had gone to spend a fortnight in Brittany with the family of his
"future brother-in-law," only to study the character of the parents
what his sister would have. He came back convinced that he would not find
obstacles on this side.

Besides, never a word, an allusion escaped him. He doesn't say
nothing that could give rise to suspicion of his projects or give the alarm. It was
too careful for that. His sister was still too young, Pascal
hadn't even left college. We had to wait, he waited.

But also with what care he surrounded this friend! How he pampered him! as
he inquired with solicitude about everything that had to do with his family!
Wasn't there, as so often happens in the provinces, some
little cousin raised on the skewer, a few union projects? Nope,
Nothing of the sort.

When Pascal was received at the École Polytechnique, Lorilleux was
certainly the happier of the two. How he congratulated his friend! What
hymn he sang to his glory! And in himself he said:

-- Come, my sister will marry an artillery officer.

But Pascal went out with number three and opted for the School of Bridges
and pavements.

--Cheer! thought Lorilleux, who was no stranger to this decision, the
garrison life would have displeased my sister, she will be the wife of a
engineer. It suits me much better.

And he was rubbing his hands.

We can judge of his disappointment when the young engineer gave his
resignation, without having consulted him, without having made him suspect anything.
This act of independence greatly displeased the doctor; even he considered it
as an indelicacy: giving up a secure position, a career
gorgeous!

--Plague be foolish! he repeated in the tone of which he would have said: Ma
poor sister has a silly husband.

However, he hid his resentment a little. Pascal was Breton,
that is to say, he clung enough to his ideas. Bring it back to a
determination was impossible. Lorilleux did not try it. It would have
been unnecessarily throwing cold on relations always so warmly
friendly. But he emphatically blamed the dazed. The madness was done,
it was necessary to take advantage of it, and the doctor already had in view certain
engineer position.

--What are you going to do now? he asked Pascal, five years ago
of lost.

"You think, dear friend, of me who thought I had put the time to good use.

--But, once again, what are you going to decide?

--You will see, I have my project.

--Ah! said Lorilleux angrily, you hadn't mentioned it to me.

--It's a surprise.

--At last! no one wishes you success more keenly than I do. But
life is not a novel. Expect disappointments. In any case,
my friendship commands me not to hide my opinion from you: you made a
foolishness.




II


Unfortunately the opinion of Lorilleux was also the opinion of M. Divorne the
father, attorney licensed at the court of first instance of Lannion
(Côtes-du-Nord).

The news of this untimely resignation hit him like a
lightning; he was shot in the heart. It was all over with his dearest
desires, projects that as a good father he had built on the head
of this only son.

See Pascal, the heir to his fortune and his name, an engineer at
Lannion, walking through the streets with this son, superb in his uniform
embroidered, sword at the side, slap on the head, such had been the dream of his
life, and now, by an incomprehensible whim, he fainted
when becoming a reality. M. Divorne said "caprice," because
Pascal purely and simply announced that he was retiring, without
No explanation, no excuse.

We would have been furious if not. The solicitor did not fail to put himself in
anger. He sent Pascal his curse. There was certainly something
justify twenty curses.

However, the first stun passed, the unhappy father tried to
reflect. Maybe he should have started there. He wondered until
how much a young man of twenty-four we managed to make
admission to the École polytechnique first, to the École des ponts and
roadways, whose education represents a capital of more than
thirty thousand francs, has the right to resign without
consent of his parents or guardians. Did he really have
straight?

The lawyer tried to doubt it. He consulted. Alas! he had to go to
evidence, and it was with deep bitterness that he recognized a
gap in the law. He cursed the legislator and accused him of improvidence,
he, the interpreter, the passionate admirer of decrees and ordinances.

Then, as if it were necessary to heighten his pain and stir up his
anger, he met in the streets of Lannion only faces
painful; we seemed to have given each other the word. It's that in no time, the
News had gone around town. The same evening we talked about it in ten
different places.

We pitied the father, we condemned the son without appeal.

From that day on, Pascal was a tall man. His compatriots decided that
he was a lost boy, who would never achieve anything, and who certainly
would end badly. An attorney was very unhappy to have such a son
which might dishonor him one day.

Someone even suggested that M. Divorne had aged ten years in two days.
years. A little longer one would have said that his hair had turned white in
a night; examples of this miracle are cited, after dreadful
disasters.

In short, Pascal would have ruined his family, made forgeries, deserved prison, that he
could hardly have been more hated; so great is the amenity of souls
provincial charities.

Madame Divorne received twenty visits during the week; she never had
had so many friends. All the women who knew her a little
found a good pretext to come and find out exactly what was going on,
to assure themselves of the truth, and turn the dagger a little
in the injury, if injury there was.

It must be said that, while condemning the son, sympathizing with the
father's pain, this punishment was generally found to strike
correct. The solicitor had always been happy, and happiness is a wrong that
is hard to forgive in small provincial towns. Success
of one is for all a cruel insult. Jealousy sleeps deep inside
all hearts. What deaf and poisoned hatreds that have not had
another starting point!

More than any other M. Divorne was envied. He had been known to be poor, and
he was rich. We remembered his terry jacket when he was
little clerk to his predecessor, and he had one of the prettiest
town houses. Ah! he had done good business.

--How lucky he is! said those whom an imbecile prudence or a
notorious incapacity attached to an immutable mediocrity, what luck
he has!

A small inheritance had allowed him to do some studies, the dowry of
his wife had paid him his attorney's office, and since then he had always
prosperous. His savings had snowballed.

And how many fathers he had once humiliated, comparing their sons to the
his! Had he paraded enough of the satisfaction this gave him?
child who every year returned laden with crowns and had only
white balls in his exams! And, later, did he sing high enough
his hopes!

What was happening was therefore a deserved punishment, a proof that must be
distrust these model schoolboys, these young people of so many
of mind: they believe in their superiority, they want to do otherwise
than their fathers did, and turn out badly. We've had it for a long time
said, the mind is immoral.

Thus, for a fortnight, all the people who approached the solicitor, delighted
deep in their souls, thought it was good taste to put their face to the
supposed tuning fork of paternal pain. At the palace, he received
daily compliments of condolence; in the circle, handshakes
of consolation.

His irritation increased as much, he was not far from believing that
Pascal had committed a crime. He was going home more furious than
never, and, for want of anything better, he took it out on his wife, whose weakness
motherly, blind and reckless, as we know, had caused all the
evil.

However, by dint of considering the situation, of studying it, M. Divorne
ended up convincing himself that the damage was not irreparable.

He was seriously thinking of writing to the Minister of the Interior, of making the
trip from Paris to solicit an audience, when Pascal, a handsome
evening, fell like a bomb in the paternal house. He arrived by
the car that does the service between Rennes and Brest.

Of course, we hardly expected it! Josette, the old maid, who was
went to open, growling against the impertinent who allowed himself to
ringing so loudly at such an hour, nearly fell over backwards in
recognizing his young master. Because she recognized him at first sight,
as she later boasted, though he was terribly
changed, and "grown and strengthened," in the three years past that she
had seen him.

She uttered a cry of joy, of surprise, and, letting go of the candle,
rushed up the stairs calling everyone to her, as if
the house would have been on fire.

Pascal, meanwhile, had closed the door and groped his way.

"It's me," he cried, laughing, "it's me, don't be afraid.

At Josette's piercing cries, the living room door had opened.

--Well! what is it, what is it? asked the solicitor, surprised at what
mess.

Josette, all moved, was not about to recover speech. But already
Madame Divorne had recognized her son's voice and rushed to his
meet. And the attorney kept repeating: "What is it, what is it?" that already
Pascal was in the arms of his mother who was crying with happiness, while
squeezing him to the suffocation on his heart.

Through him, through this beloved son, she had suffered well for fifteen
days; but his presence alone was a complete vindication, a
more than adequate compensation. He appeared, and all was forgiven, or
rather forgotten.

As for M. Divorne, he thought it his dignity to remain impassive.
Could he do less for the principle of paternal authority? He
succeeds, my faith, in controlling his emotion, not without difficulty, not without
slight grimace that hid a tear. But in the end he remained
suitably cold and stern, and his face expressed displeasure,
even in embracing this son, once his joy and his pride.

For example, that's all he could take on himself. In the embrace of
his son, he felt that his anger melted like the snows to the breezes
of April. Tenderness overcame him. "He did not want to give his
weakness in spectacle," and, claiming an urgent matter,--a
urgent business at Lannion, at nine o'clock in the evening!--he went out
hastily, blowing his nose harder than necessary.

The prodigal son had returned, and the father, like the one in Scripture,
had not ordered the fattened calf to be killed to celebrate the return. He is
true that the father of Scripture was not a solicitor in the court of
first case.

Pascal therefore remained alone with his mother. We had to take care of doing
supper the traveler.

He had the appetite of a man who for two days has been living on account
hastily stolen from railway buffets, that is to say,
not wanting to choke, he was dying of hunger. Josette hastened
to set the table in front of the fireplace. She went, came, from the living room to
the kitchen, from the kitchen to the living room, losing my mind, doing ten rounds
for a; from time to time she wiped away a tear or broke a
plate, manifest proofs of his emotion.

Madame Divorne was seated opposite her devouring son. She
was in ecstasy, she admired him, she wished she could stay like that
years. But an explanation was imminent between Pascal and his
father, this explanation could be stormy. Wasn't it necessary
warn Pascal, obtain some concession from him? She wanted
to intervene, at the risk of drawing upon her the weight of two angers.

"Your father is very irritated, naughty child," she said; you give us, you
at least give him a lot of torment.

"No, dear mother, I assure you; go, be quiet, it will not be
nothing.

"At least it was necessary to warn him, to ask his advice.

-- Certain in advance of a refusal! What madness! I would have overlooked: judge
so.

--At least promise me to be reasonable if he scolds you, not to
get angry.

--I promise you; but you will see how right I was.

--Ah! I hope so, murmured Madame Divorne sadly.

Pascal embraced her, and her cause was won. Now she was ready to
side with her son, sure he couldn't be wrong.

Yet that's how difficult all mothers are to convince! Ah!
they don't pay for the wrong reasons!

It seems that the solicitor did not recover his courage on the way. When he
came back, the urgent business over, his face was far from having won
in severity. Nothing was said. He chatted very amicably with
his son. He laughed, joked, but of the resignation, not a word.

There was no more question of it the next day, nor the following days.
God knows, however, that we did not fail to ask him everywhere
where it appeared:

"So your son is here?" Well?...

The rumor of this return had indeed spread very quickly. We had seen the
postman entering the solicitor's office with a trunk and a hat box: the
visits besieged the house. But Madame Divorne forbade her door.
She made enemies that day who have not yet
forgiven.

Once Pascal took it into his head to go out. He had not taken a hundred steps in the
street only five people already, two of whom he hardly knew and one
whom he did not know at all, had come to shake his hand and
ask him hypocritically for news of the School of Bridges and
pavements.

He ran home, cursing his compatriots, and swearing to himself
not to put your nose outside.

The days passed, and M. Divorne seemed to have completely forgotten
his grievances against his son. Twenty times this, than this state
of uncertainty tormented, would have gone ahead of the explanation that he
had come to seek; his mother always held him back.

"Wait," she said to him. I know your father, he is very long
take a side. He's been thinking since you arrived. When his decision
will be stopped, he will let you know, don't worry.

One morning, in fact, after breakfast, when the tablecloth was removed, the lawyer,
with a serious air, asked his son to give him his full attention.

Come on, thought Pascal, the moment has come.

M. Divorne was usually talkative, they reproached him for it at the palace;
but never, as on this solemn occasion, did he abuse the gift
precious of speech.

The beginning of his speech was a kind of invocation to paternal love.
Who better than he understood its duties? He made him his son
judge: had he given enough proof of his affection? And what had
was his reward?

Then he passed to the enumeration of the innumerable worries caused by
children. Nothing was forgotten, neither the anxieties of the first
teething, nor a post trip to Paris, at a time when Pascal had
was sick. This was the first point.

The second dealt with pecuniary sacrifices. It was the longest.
The solicitor calculated, quantified all that he had disbursed,--to a pair of
shoes close,--to give his son the benefits of this education
which he himself had missed.

Finally, of course, in a third part, he tackled the chapter
compensations: he took into account the satisfactions of all kinds that he
owed to Pascal. They were numerous, he did not omit a single one.

In a word, this speech was like reading the ledger in part
double of paternity, with its sorrows, its losses on the one hand, its
joys, its benefits on the other. Until then, M. Divorne had observed,
the balance was in favor of his son, and he, the father,
acknowledged debtor.

"And now," he added in conclusion, "I hope, Pascal,
that you will not want to change this state of affairs. You had to think
since you've been here, you must regret having so madly broken your
career. Go back on your decision, talk to the minister, he won't
won't deny your reinstatement, and I'm ready to forgive you the snitch
sorrow you have caused me.

The effect produced was far from that expected by M. Divorne. Pascal
remained silent for a few moments, as if he had gathered all his
strengths. One might have thought he hesitated to answer. Finally, with one voice
closed:

"Father," he said, "what you desire is impossible. My request,
believe it, would be pushed back; besides, I couldn't make up my mind
To do.

"Very well," resumed the attorney, with the most displeased air; it's so easy
today to make a position. No doubt you have found
better?

--If not better, at least more to my taste. You must think I have
think before acting. As for my intentions, I came here
precisely to let you know. It was all the more necessary,
that I will need you.

--It is really very happy. I understand then that you thought of
me. And how can I help you?

--Before undertaking anything, it is necessary that I obtain
funds, and I counted...

--Ah! here we are, then, said the solicitor in a mocking tone; you need some
funds... But it seems to me that before leaving a ready-made position,
you had to make sure of my goodwill. If I refused you... and certainly,
I will refuse...

"But, my father," resumed Pascal with a little impatience, "it seems to me
that about ten years ago one of my aunts left me by her
testament forty thousand francs.

A sixty-year-old litigant, almost certain of winning a
of his lawsuits, would have come to say to the solicitor: "--I renounce it," she would have
certainly less surprised than he was at his son's words.

"That is to say, you are holding me to account," he pronounced with
bitterness. Ah! it is a cruel surprise.

Pascal defended himself in vain, the blow was struck. He tried to explain
future projects, he wanted to justify himself, to make known the employment of
the money he was asking for, M. Divorne even refused to listen to him.

--Hey! what does it matter to me, he said, I don't want to know anything.

Indeed, it was far from the present discussion. He had forgotten
until resignation; he thought only of the means of saving this
money that Pascal, he had to tell himself, was entitled to
claim.

He was looking for some way to give as little as possible, convinced
that such a young man could only make a detestable use of a sum
so strong.

--Come on, Pascal, he said finally, I understand that you need
silver. However, you could go about it another way to get rid of me.
ask. Am I a ridiculous father? Have I ever refused you? You
didn't abuse it, I admit it. But you've been working for five years
a lot, maybe you want to have fun, take a trip...

"No, Father, if you let me speak, I'll...

--Shut up, listen: no doubt you have debts. Hey! my God! all the
young people have...

--I don't owe a penny.

"But listen to me, I'm not asking you anything. Be frank, you need
five thousand francs?

--My dear father...

"You need more... be it, you will have ten thousand francs."

And the lawyer, rising, as if to announce that the discussion was over.
closed, headed for the door. Pascal understood that he had to get it over with.

"Father," he said, "I need everything or nothing.

"Nothing then," replied M. Divorne in a threatening tone, going back on his
not; nothing. Do you think I will, young fool, let you dissipate your
small fortune?

--This money is necessary to me, nevertheless, indispensable.

--Ah! this is essential; is. Your aunt left you a farm, a
firm that I will return to you in good condition, with an advantageous lease. Is,
take back your possessions and settle down. What will you do with it?

--I will sell them.

--And you think it will give you money overnight? He
you have to wait for an opportunity, look for a buyer, put up posters...

--I will look, I will put up posters.

"But you don't think of it, wretch! and what would we say to Lannion, if we
saw you sell only one franc of land! Do you know what it looks like?

--Hey! what do I care! exclaimed Pascal with vivacity. I will order the
posters of this step.

M. Divorne knew his son. He understood that his determination was
plug.

--Stop, he said, I want to spare you this shame. I will find
money, even if I had to make a sacrifice.

Pascal, who regretted having let himself get carried away for a moment, wanted
take his father's hands; but he pushed him away.

"Spare yourself useless protests," he said; and he added with an air
d'ironie: You will, I hope, allow me eight days.

And he left, closing the door violently.

During this discussion, Madame Divorne had not uttered a
speech; she cried. Pascal, whom paternal anger had strengthened
in his resolve, felt weak before his mother's tears.

He knelt beside her, and taking her hands:

"Mother," he said, "dear mother, one word, say one word, and I renounce my
projects, and I'm trying to withdraw my resignation.

A flash of joy shone in Madame Divorne's eyes, a flash of
also triumphs. How his son loved him! what did he not sacrifice to her,
him so firm just now!

--No, my Pascal, no, follow your inspirations, I trust myself.

--Dear mother, at least you must know...

"Nothing, I don't want to know anything. I repeat it to you, I have confidence;
would I understand, by the way?

And as he persisted, she closed his mouth with both hands.

The house was very sad during the days that followed. The attorney was
dark and didn't say a word. He was seen only at mealtimes; the
the rest of the time he shut himself up in his study. Mrs. Divorne
hid to cry.

Pascal had no idea of such torture. He would have given two years of
his life to be able to leave. If only he had been able to talk about his projects,
lay out their plans. But no, he made near his father two or three
useless attempts, and his mother always answered him: "--I have
confidence," without wanting to let him say a word.

Finally, on the appointed day, M. Divorne took his son to his study.

"Here," he said, showing her a bundle of deeds, "your accounts of
guardianship. See if I have administered your property like a good father.
Read, and give me a receipt.

Pascal took a pen.

"No, read," insisted the lawyer.

And as the young man refused, he took the deeds, and himself read
aloud, emphasizing certain details, and from time to time
stopping to ask:

--Are you satisfied with my management?

The acts were long. Pascal was dying of impatience when at last
this reading, a real torture that lasted nearly three hours, was
finished.

"Now," said the father, "here is your money. It comes back to you, like
you could convince yourself, forty-three thousand seven hundred
fifty-six francs sixty centimes. Count if everything is there.

Pascal put the notes and the money in his pocket; his father stopped him:

--No, reckon, I tell you, I want to.

We had to obey.

--We're quits, aren't we? then said the lawyer. When
will you go?

--But as soon as possible, tomorrow, if I can get a place in
the car... They're waiting for me in Paris.

"Indeed, you would be wrong to keep you waiting.

"However, my father, I would not like to leave us thus; you are
unfair to me, and I...

--Songs that all this! said the attorney impatiently; leave me, i have
to work.

The next morning, at nine o'clock, the courier boy came
tell Pascal that the horses were hitched to the diligence, and that he
only had time to get to the office.

The farewells were painful. Madame Divorne was sobbing. To see her
hugging her son, one would have thought that she was kissing him for the
last time. Pascal was hardly less moved than his mother; barely if he
could hold back her tears; it would have been impossible for him to pronounce a
word.

It was in this circumstance that M. Divorne clearly showed what was the
strength of character and energy of will--a will to
fer.--Not only did he not want to kiss his son, but he
refused to shake her hand. He even affected a mocking and relaxed tone.

"Remember," he said to his son, "that you carry with you all
your wealth. When it dissipates, which I presume will not
not long, you will no doubt do me the honor of having recourse to me; I'm going
always have your room prepared.

Pascal went alone to the diligence. The people of Lannion concluded
that he had just been driven out by his father.




III


It will be six years, come the month of February, that Pascal has returned to
Paris after his expedition to Brittany. He arrived at the station
Montparnasse by the five o'clock train.

It was a pretty chilly seven to eight degrees below zero.
However, no frozen traveler was found in the wagons: this
accident sometimes happened in winter, before the happy idea, which had
the Companies, to use for the benefit of travelers the steam lost from
the locomotive.

Pascal had made a sad trip. He adored his parents, and the idea of
grief he had just caused them weighed on his heart like a
remorse. Never did the road seem longer to him; it seemed to him that the
locomotive was running on the spot: he longed to be in Paris. Some
hours of sleep would have deceived his impatience, but it was in vain
that on several occasions he made arrangements to rest: barely
closed his eyes, that he was awakened by one of the many
agents that the Company maintains and pays to prevent travelers
of sleeping; at every moment he was asked for his ticket, to make
variously shaped holes with a small iron instrument.

It must also be said that the young engineer had not been brought up to
walk around with 40,000 francs in his wallet. The wad of banknotes
of Bank he had in his pocket did not fail to worry him a little. In
a prudent man, he kept his hands on it, from Lannion to Paris. Arriving,
his arm was numb.

Worn out with fatigue, his legs broken, he went to the room where he is
it is customary for travelers to wait for their luggage for a few
quarters of an hour. He had just sat down, when he heard himself called by
a happy voice.

--Hey! mr engineer! mr engineer!

He turned round, and along the grate so ingeniously arranged for
separate the newcomers from their friends who had come to meet them, he saw
a fat man with a bright face who made all sorts of signs to her
of friendship. He ran to him.

"At last, here you are, Mr. Engineer," said the man, "I have received your
letter, I was expecting you. Did you have a good trip, at least?

--Not the best. Ah! Father Lantier, if you hadn't had my word!
Finally, I have the money.

--Hush!... lower, in the name of heaven... if we could hear you! Is it
talking about money like that out loud? Mine is ready too; I
took it to the Bank. At home, it prevented me from sleeping. We're going
make it a little work, this money, please.

"Yes," said Pascal with a sigh, "it's a matter of not losing the game.

--To lose the game, Mr. Engineer, with all the trumps in hand;
you want to laugh, no doubt. Oh that! you stay at my house, here, at
two steps.

"But, my brave friend, I am going to hamper you horribly.

--To bother me! a man like you. Ah! you wouldn't insult me
get off at the hotel! You'll have a good nap until lunch, we
we'll talk afterwards. Come on, I've unearthed a famous deal. I'm going
always looking for a car.

If Lantier did not fire the cannon for the engineer, it was because he had no
no cannon. But the house had been turned upside down; a
good warm room, a bottle of old wine, a broth
delicious awaited Pascal. When he was ready to go to bed:

"I leave you," said Lantier to him; if you miss something,
call...

--Thank you, I only need sleep. See you later, my dear partner.

The brave man closed the door gently and walked away on the tip of the
foot.

"Yet it is true," he said to himself, "I am his partner." who would have me
said that, that I would become the partner of a man like him, who was
the first of the bridges and roadways!

Jean Lantier, Pascal's partner, is currently one of
wealthy entrepreneurs in Paris. He will never be very rich, because he
is not ambitious. He intends to retire from business as soon as he
will be able to give 50,000 crowns to each of his daughters; he has three, all
by keeping for himself an income of twenty thousand pounds.

Twenty years ago, Jean Lantier rolled the wheelbarrow on a large
road, in the service of bridges and roadways. He was cheerful and healthy.
As he earned 67 francs a month, after deducting a deduction for
the pension fund,--as he had a good conduct and that he
was not bad in person, he found a good match to establish himself.

He married, and received as a dowry from his father-in-law a round sum of 6,000
francs in good ringing crowns. His wife was sweet, pretty, good
household; he found himself the happiest of men.

But the children came. The family increased, the salary
remained the same, embarrassment entered the household. Jean Lantier did not win
more than enough to keep him and his family from starving.
We used to put aside, we had to take it from the bag.

"It can't go on like this," muttered Lantier incessantly. And a beautiful
day he gave a whim.

"Happy luck," he said. He returned to the administration shovel and
wheelbarrow, in spite of his wife who urged him to wait.

At the head of a capital of 2,000 ecus, he embarked on the business
of earthworks. But in everything there must be an apprenticeship: he learned it by
his costs. His first business swallowed up half of his assets. He ... not
not be discouraged. Feeling the inadequacy of his education, he
worked in the evening, and even spent a few lessons. After
two or three enterprises _de blanc_, that is to say without profits or
losses, he regained the lost capital, risked it again, increased it,
and finally doubled it.

At forty, he was at the head of 40,000 francs which were not due
a penny to anyone. And he had lived well, and neither the wife nor the
children had not endured deprivation.

It was around this time that Jean Lantier made the acquaintance of Pascal, who
supervised the works for which he had the concession.

The young engineer befriended his contractor. It was a
a hard-working, intelligent man, one could count on him. All those who
knew him esteemed him. His colleagues called him a
spoiler, because once a treaty was signed, he used to
execute it, even if he loses.

It happened that Pascal had the opportunity to render a rather great service to
his contractor. Contrary to the ordinary, the obligee was grateful. Jeans
Lantier, who had always professed great veneration for
bridges and roads, transferred all this veneration to the young
engineer. Soon his admiration knew no bounds, he was going
everywhere singing his praises, and all the good things he said he
thought.

When the work was finished, the contractor did not lose sight of Pascal. He
went to see him quite often, sometimes for the sole pleasure of chatting with
him, sometimes to ask him for advice. Without quite knowing why,
Lantier would have thrown himself into the fire for his friend the engineer.

However, Pascal's final year of studies was coming to an end, and
already he was seriously thinking of handing in his resignation. If he hesitated, if he
was still late, it was because he wanted to find something to use right away
his activity and skills. He waited impatiently for the result
of certain steps he had just taken with a large company
a railway.

The answer was slow in coming.

Jean Lantier, without realizing it, put an end to the young man's uncertainty.

We were then at the height of the demolitions of Paris, if however they
decreases. Entire neighborhoods were given leave, crowded streets
fell, and were as if by magic replaced by ways
news. Lantier dreamed of becoming a demolisher.

It is a very modern profession, which has its heroes and its dupes, but
which has many millionaires.

Before attempting anything, however, before entrusting his fate and his money
to a sealed bid, the contractor had come to consult the young
engineer. The brave man was intoxicated with his hopes, his projects
went to their heads. He talked about it constantly, and with the volubility of
enthusiasm; he expounded them with the clarity of conviction.

He quickly informed Pascal. He explained to her the mysteries of a
profession then much less known than today, and showed him the strong
and the weak. He spoke as an expert, having long studied "the
building," both for demolition and for construction.
When it has taken forty years to amass penny by penny 40,000 francs, one does not
does not willingly expose them on a single card.

But Lantier was sure of his fact. He had already tried a few
little speculations which had succeeded him; he had eighths,
twelfths of lots, and he only regretted one thing, to have been
too timid, too cautious. He had a vocation. Never
wrecker no longer made ingenious use of old materials: he
was the first who had the idea of undertaking on a large scale the sale of
demolition wood as firewood. It occupies twenty men in the
vast construction site that he established near the old barrier of Monceaux,
and every day hundreds of cubic meters of heavy wood are sold there,
that well-to-do people buy, and thousands of little bundles of five
under, economical heating of poor households.

Involuntarily, Pascal gave his full attention to a man so sure of
succeed that he was confident of doubling his capital in less than a year.

"You see, engineer," said Lantier, "this is how the
thing happens: The city wants to demolish a neighborhood to rebuild it,
is not it? He must clear the ground well and throw down the
old buildings. What does she do then? she divides her neighborhood
in lots of two, four, ten houses, it depends; then she puts
these lots at auction. Contractors bid, and whoever
offers the most advantageous conditions to the lot. You understand well
that among people in the trade, we are reasonable enough to get along and not
not drop prices. So whether we have one auction out of five or
six, and we do our business nicely...

"But you need a lot of money," objected Pascal.

--Not as long as you think. The city gives credit. She is content with a
guarantee which varies according to the size of the lot. But we are not
a long time to make cash. Everything sells, you see,
in a house, from the gable to the foundations, from the cellar to the attic. We
built, if one demolishes, and those who make build have profit with
buy old, which is just as good to use as new;
they quickly rid the wreckers of their goods. We give them
cedes slates, doors, windows, fireplaces,
tiles, stairs, everything, stone, wood and iron.
From the slats of the roof, we make bundles for two cents, we debit the
beams too old to use again, we clean the bricks, and we
still finds to get rid of the platras...

--But do we really make money?

"By bushels, sir, by bushels...

And look, you know big Joigny well, don't you, who
worked with me? well! at this hour he has a car, yes,
sir, a car, and he paid for it, and it is his... Yet he
was dumb and lazy, and he started with two pennies he had
borrowed. Ah! if I had a hundred thousand francs instead of forty thousand,
and the happiness of having a man like you with me...

Lantier stopped, realizing that his listener was no longer listening to him.

--Ah! murmured Pascal, answering his secret thoughts, it's good
tempting.

--What! How? 'Or' What! What do you say! cried the entrepreneur, the heart you
would he say? No, that would be too lucky. It is for once that my
fortune would be made. What am I missing? is to see
big. Big deals scare me, and I miss the best ones
occasions. Then you have to make connections, as they say, see
one, see the other, chat with the bigwigs to keep up
running, and I dare not; while with you!... ah! I would not have
no longer afraid of sinking; I would go and find the prefect himself, yes, and I
would say to him: "You want to demolish Paris; either, I take care of it, and that's it
engineer who will rebuild it for you, and a little better, I dare
say, that all your architects."

The brave man's enthusiasm made Pascal smile.

"You are laughing," he continued, "yet I would do as I say. It's not
not tear everything down, you have to rebuild: that's your business. And to this
we still win big. Three old houses are made into a new one.
It doesn't get any smarter than that... But bast, are you thinking
only that I debit you there?

"Listen, Lantier," resumed Pascal, "I need to think about everything
what you just told me. I can complete the hundred thousand francs, and
it is possible that I realize your idea of association. iron in
three days, and I'll get back to you.

On the appointed day, long before the hour, Lantier, who was no longer living,
presented himself to the engineer, his heart beating with fear and
of hope.

--Well! said Pascal to him, as soon as he entered, I thought, it's a
deal done.

Lantier almost went mad with joy.

--To us Paris! he cried.

And in his elation he kissed his engineer, and then he
begged for forgiveness from the great freedom.

It was then agreed that Pascal was going to leave for Brittany in order to
get the necessary money. The contractor, for his part, had to
during the trip of his partner, raise his capital and put himself in
quest for some bargain, because it was a question of not losing a
minute.

The two partners proved that they knew the value of the
weather. From the day of his arrival, Pascal found the task prepared.
He had scarcely had breakfast, after having rested well, when Lantier went
look for a large sheet of paper on which he had taken his
notes, and demonstrated to him the necessity of buying half a dozen
houses in the rue de la Harpe, which were then demolished to make room
at Boulevard Saint-Michel.

When Lantier was finished, they agreed to go together the next day.
visit their future acquisitions. They did indeed go there, and after
a day spent measuring, calculating, estimating the value
approximate of each thing, they fixed their final price, and the
same evening Pascal wrote the first submission of the Pascal company and
Lantier.

They had every chance of winning, because their offer was
high; but for their first affair they had decided to
content with a very small profit, sufficient however, in view of the
chance of loss: about thirty thousand francs, at their
estimate. That done, they just had to wait for the result.

However, Pascal could not stay forever with his partner,
although the latter had greatly desired it. He went in search of a
home, painful search, and, after having climbed a hundred
floors, he ends up taking a small, fully furnished apartment that does not
was not suitable in the least; but this apartment was a stone's throw away
of the Hôtel de Ville, now the center of its operations. It's in
effect under the attic of the hotel of the prefecture of the Seine, in a
glazed gallery, one hundred and eighty steps above the ground,
deal with all major road matters.

Pascal had barely settled into his new home when he saw
rush Lorilleux, informed at last of his return. The doctor had no
Been worry-free for a month. What had become of the future husband of her
sister? what was he planning to do? would he come back? And he despaired.
So he came quickly to hear from her.

On entering his friend's house, he bumped into Jean Lantier who was going out,
but he took no notice of this man who wore the costume of
wealthy workers.

"Finally, I have my deserter," he cried from the door; here it is
returned, the carrier pigeon; let me shake your hands and lay down
in a question mark. Oh that! what does this fugue mean, will you deign
teach me?

--Oh! very gladly, especially since there is no more to come back now
on my determination...

--That is to say, you dreaded my advice, your madness mistrusted my
wisdom. Very well! I am fixed; you must have done some crazy things.

--I do not think so.

--Excuse yourself, then, defend yourself, I'm listening.

"Well, my dear friend, I am a dealer in old houses, a mason in
fat, demolition contractor, if you like it better.

--Oh! it's impossible! exclaimed the doctor, you, a former student of
the École polytechnique?... you're probably joking.

--Not in the least, and that fat man covered in plaster you have
bumped upon entering is my associate; he came to tell me that we are
purchasers of nine houses in rue de la Harpe; we're going to put it there
peak tomorrow.

So he told the doctor the story of the association, of the trip to
Bretagne, forty thousand francs, the anger of M. Divorne.

Lorilleux, listening to him, seemed more surprised than a man falling
nudes. Every moment he uttered exclamations of astonishment,
ohs! ah! he raised his arms in despair towards the sky. At last,
when Pascal had finished:

"Dear friend," he said to him, "you've lost your mind, there's nothing
that. You believe that life is a novel, and you acted like a hero of
serial. When Paul Féval wishes one of his characters well, he
gives him a gift of a million, with no purse. But in life
real, you don't find millions like that.

--Who knows? answered Pascal with a hint of fatuity.

"You don't need advice," resumed the doctor, "but
a shower. You're just a lost poet at the School of Bridges and Roads,
which, however, is far from Parnassus. Would you have believed that from a
mathematician? My poor friend, you know nothing of the existence, nor of its
difficulties, and I see with pain that you are going to teach your
costs. However, I was to serve as an example to you.

--Do you know that you are not encouraging!

--Alas! is that I am in the right.

On this subject, the conversation stopped there. As Pascal had said, he
was too late to retrace his steps, and Lorilleux would have
unnecessarily offended his friend.

But the doctor came out more displeased than he had ever been. This
prank of his friend cost, he told himself at least, forty thousand
frank to his sister; for he considered this money as lost, and he
was mourning. One thing, however, consoled him, and that was that
probably this experience would singularly chill Pascal, and the
would lead to more positive ideas. They say that past follies
are a pledge of wisdom for the future. Better than the dizzy
spent forty thousand francs before his marriage than to ruin himself
when he was a father. This school, moreover, did not ruin him
not. He still had to expect a pretty ease from his family.

Such were the reflections of Lorilleux. Finally, like something
misfortune is always good, he thought, not without a certain
satisfaction that this event put Pascal under his control. So, he
remained close to him, and he intended to redouble his care and
surround it with a stricter surveillance. So he wouldn't escape
certainly not; while, appointed engineer in the provinces, he would have
very well could have married without telling his friend. What would have become of
his plans?...

We can think after that that the doctor was Pascal's faithful guest, he
came almost every day to spend the evening with him.

--How is the novel going? he asked from time to time.

"Not badly," answered Jean Lantier's partner.

Indeed, if the enterprise was romantic, the profits were
real. The houses in the rue de la Harpe had given less than we could
hoped, but a few others had given more. two lots
important near Saint-Lazare had mainly provided profits
completely unexpected.

It is true that the two partners, Pascal the head and Lantier the arms,
did not spare their pains, nor their efforts. Pascal was running from
morning to evening, made ten visits, drafted contracts and
submissions, besieged the commissions and offices of the Hôtel de
City. Lantier, in plaster up to his knees, counted the stones and
the beams, and did not shrink from the liters of wine necessary to
closing small sales.

This activity gave Lorilleux a lot to think about, and he was not
without noticing the happy air of the two partners. Pascal took more
self-confidence, one guessed the successful man from his balance. The belly of
Lantier rounded out.

"So he's not deceiving me," said the doctor to himself, "so he's succeeded." It is 
prodigious, it is incredible; but anyway, so much the better, it's for my
sister that he works, and I must rejoice doubly, as a friend and
as brother-in-law.

Pascal's parents had naturally been the first educated
the success of his businesses. We didn't want to listen to him when he
was in Lannion, he knew very well that people would read him. It was not happening
failing to write often; but Madame Divorne alone answered. All the
weeks, regularly, she sent her son a good letter,
very long, very tender, as only mothers know how to write. For
the lawyer, he persisted in keeping silence; he seemed to have lost
the use of the pen.

In the beginning, Pascal was very distressed by this obstinacy
from his father; little by little, he worried less about it, knowing full well that he
would give back and that his grudge would not stand before good and solid
arguments, on the state or on first mortgage.

And these arguments, the young engineer was able to provide them. The
business was getting better and better, the wreckers didn't know where
give pickaxe; so that the partners, when they made their
inventory, after two years, found that each of them possessed
a little over one hundred and sixty thousand francs. Twenty-sou coins
had become five-franc pieces, to speak like Jean
Lantier.

This magical result dazzled Lorilleux. He wanted to doubt, but he
had to be quiet, the figures were there.

"Perhaps you should stop," he said to his friend; won't you compromise
not in your future speculations what you have so fortunately gained?

Pascal did not hear it that way. It had not happened, as
he said so, basically a mason to stop on such a beautiful path. Doctor
had to impose silence on the worried voice he called his prudence. He
resigned himself to thinking that his sister would have a car, and he made up his mind to
borrow it from him sometimes, to dazzle certain customers who
persist in not believing in talent that goes on foot.

But Pascal was not yet thinking of the car, or at least not.
didn't speak. Only, as he was very ill in his little
housing, he resolved to make himself a little comfortable. He liked the
comfortable, and thought he had earned it well.

As a result, he rented a pretty apartment in the rue de Rivoli, of which
the windows overlooked the Square Saint-Jacques. He hardly paid
more than three times what it was worth. The view, it must be said, was
included in the price.

This view was one of the most beautiful in Paris, it was not yet
masked by these two unfortunate theaters, silly and pretentious
constructions, near which the Saint-Jacques tower, this inimitable
jewel, seems a protest of art and good taste.

As a prudent man who wants to be able to make a repair or a
embellishment, without risking the next day to be increased or to receive
leave, Pascal made a lease. Besides the price of his rent, he had to
pay various small fees that increased the price by one-sixth
agreed; but he didn't want to quibble over so little: you have to
conform to usage.

He paid six months in advance, took the oath in the hands of the porter
to comply with the customs of the house, signed an inventory which
cost one hundred and seventeen francs fifty-five centimes, fills various
other formalities, and finally was home. In Paris, having a home
is not more difficult than that.

Then he put the workers in his apartment. Of the seven pieces which
were composing, he made three, and then he could receive more than two
people at a time, stretch out your arms without danger of hurting your
hands, and sneeze without risking breaking the globe of his clock.

The owner let it be cut to his whim, promising himself to
make him pay dearly, later, for these damages to his building.

It was then that Pascal really went crazy. He cut off from Croesus, and
spent no less than a dozen thousand francs to gild his
lares. For that price he had some fine furniture, carpets,
tasteful fabrics and three or four of those bronzes that one does not meet
not on all the clocks of elegant hairdressers.

Singular thing! Lorilleux in this circumstance seemed to forget his role
of Mentor. Far from preaching economy, he almost encouraged spending.
He had calculated that the apartment would be big enough for a young
household, and he thought buying furniture was an expense
necessary that it was worth doing right away. If he was interested if
highly to the layout of the apartment, the wood of the furniture, the
color of the hangings is that he furnished in thought the apartment
of his sister. His conviction was such that he prevented his friend
to buy a small painting by Boucher, a masterpiece, because it
found the subject unsuitable.

It was, however, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

It was around this time that, suddenly, the noise of the immense
Pascal's riches spread to Lannion. He had moved his louis
of gold, and their tinkling had come to the ears of his
compatriots. The whole town soon knew without a doubt that the son
M. Divorne was three or four times a millionaire, to say the least.

This incredible news had been brought by two children of the
city, who, after having come to try their fortune in Paris, returned to
country, Gros-Jean as before, poorer by a few thousand crowns, but
rich in this conviction that there are many called and few chosen.
They had needed Pascal and had found him at the critical moment.

The good people measured the luxury of their compatriot by their
gratitude, and they told whoever would listen that he
drove a car and lived in the capital a palace of the Thousand and One
nights.

They were only half believed, when all the facts they had
advanced were confirmed and beyond by a young student to whom Pascal
had once lent eighty francs to go to a masked ball, and
a hundred francs another day to appease a menacing tailor.

This young man, who had dined sometimes with Pascal, never stopped
about her. The oak furniture and the bronzes had dazzled him: no one
not yet know in the Latin Quarter all that is made in Paris from
old oak with varnished pasteboard, and Florentine bronze with
putty prepared by electroplating.

This student, who was still amazed at the magnificence and the
generosity of Pascal, amazed his compatriots by his descriptions,
done in good faith. According to him, the engineer was washing his hands in
gold, and at night rested on mattresses of banknotes.

Exaggerations admitted as certain things, Pascal was more admired
that he had not been reviled. The fathers who had once trembled to have
such a son, cited him as an example to their children; those who
had mistreated him the most did not forgive themselves this offense, this
capital lese crime. Ah! money is a powerful advocate!

The immediate and clearest result of this reversal of opinion was
for Pascal an avalanche of letters: we recalled to his memory, we
solicited his protection for a nephew, he was denounced the people who
spoke badly of him. A municipal councilor ventured to him
write and make an appeal to "his good heart, in the name of the poor of
Lannion, his hometown.

Pascal answered no one, but he put five hundred francs
for the poor. From this royal munificence, we see that his
fortune had not been exaggerated; one recognized by this trait the man whose
signature on a cloth of paper gives this cloth the value of
cash money. He was hailed a millionaire. As for asking where and
how he had earned this enormous fortune, no one had any idea.
These are indiscreet questions addressed only to the poor.
devils.

As a result of these little events, the importance of M. Divorne increased.
singularly; his consideration increases a hundred cubits. He collected
the benefits of his son's success. It reflects on his forehead
some of the golden rays that made Pascal's halo. We greeted
with reverence the father of such a rich man.

And yet, the solicitor was the only one who did not believe what he
called small-town gossip. Pascal had indeed written that he
earned money; but was it likely? He predicted to his son
that he would ruin himself; prediction had to be fulfilled, for a father
must not be mistaken, and every day he expected to see him return
reduced to a sack.

The sending of the five hundred francs, very quickly known to everyone, shook
his convictions. Who guaranteed him the falsity of all these gossip?
Every day we see more surprising things. He worried, and
his mind was singularly troubled. All his ideas were
upset, and he did not yet know exactly whether he should grieve
to have been a bad prophet, or to rejoice in the success of his son, to
to suppose that this success was real.

This state of uncertainty was unbearable for the solicitor. But he does
didn't want the idea of going to ascertain the facts to seem to come from him.
He very adroitly brought his wife, who asked for nothing better, to
hurry to make the trip to Paris. To save appearances, he
resisted for some time, weakly it is true, and finally seemed to
give in to the solicitations of a worried mother. One fine day he confessed
defeated, and as he had taken his measures in advance, he made up his mind
suddenly, and left without warning. He wanted to surprise his son, that he
not surprised in the least.

Pascal was talking very quietly with Lorilleux, who was devoting
almost every evening when her father came in. He was mediocre
astonished, but very joyful; for a long time he had hoped and waited for this
small triumph. It was with real happiness that he kissed his father,
which in this circumstance departs from its usual coldness, and
softened, although there was a witness to his weakness.

At first glance, the lawyer understood that there must be some truth
in the letters of Pascal; also he was a little ashamed of his long
"firmness," but he did not let it show, and took it upon himself to
show kind and affectionate.

As he wanted information, he told long and cheerfully
the noises that had agitated Lannion. Pascal, while laughing a lot of
the fertile imagination of his compatriots, did not want to leave more
his father in doubt for a long time, and in a few words he explained to him the
figure of his fortune. He had an income of about eight thousand livres,
earned in just over two years.

It was a long way from this modest income to the millions from which it was
gratified; it was little in comparison. But this little still seemed huge to
the confessor. Reflecting on himself, he remembered that at the age of
twenty-six years old, what his son was then, he was a mere second
clerk in a provincial study, with meager salaries of a thousand
francs per year. So much money earned in such a short time shocked all his
ideas. He could not help saying that this property was, in his opinion, too
easily acquired. He praised the time when it took twenty-five years to
amass four thousand pounds of income, without thinking that a hundred thousand pounds
of this golden age represented almost a hundred thousand crowns of our age of
iron.

Then, as he was one of those men who still want to be right,
when the evidence showed them their error, he went up his hobby
favourite, and proved plain as day to his son that he had had the most
great wrong to resign and not listen to the advice
sense of a father who had more experience than him. But he did
without bitterness and only to preserve its advantages.

"You would have the millions we lend you," he said to his son, "I will
I would repeat again: you were wrong. I'm too firm in my principles
for a success to vary them. You succeeded, but you had to
to fail. An exception does nothing to the rule, and you are an exception.

Pascal agreed to everything with the best grace in the world. to what him
would have served to fight opinions more solid than rock, than
sea wears out in the long run? He would also have had to deal with two adversaries,
for Lorilleux lent the solicitor the support of his eloquence. Lorilleux
triumphed at last, he found someone who understood life like him;
he abused his advantages.

This first evening suited the attorney and the doctor as well as possible, and the fifteen
days that followed only increased the esteem and friendship they
felt for each other. The more they talked, the better
it was shown that they agreed on all points. the
Machiavellian Lorilleux profited very skilfully from this good fortune
to establish himself firmly in the heart of his friend's father. Even with
precautions and infinite delicacy, he dared to speak of
Pascal's future establishment, and was overjoyed when he
thought he discovered that M. Divorne would not look at the woman's dowry
what his son would choose.

A fortnight passed like a dream for the solicitor; it would have been
perfectly satisfied, if Pascal had had one of those titles which
look so good on a business card; but he had none, because
one cannot decently call oneself a "wrecker." He couldn't help but
communicate his grief to his son.

"If someone asks me what you are doing," he said to her, "what shall I answer?"

--Hey! dear father, replied Pascal, am I not always an engineer and
more than ever an architect? Say, if you want, that I rebuilt
Paris.

"You're always joking," said the attorney, ill-tempered. When will you be
serious as M. Lorilleux! here is a calm man, at least, and who hears
life. You are happy in everything, because you can boast of having a friend there
who is devoted to you, and that is a rare thing.

Jean Lantier also pleased M. Divorne very much. It had been a little
surprised to see his son such an associate who would have worn the jacket
round with more ease than the frock coat, but the roundness of the man
charmed him. The entrepreneur, in honor of his partner's father, had
gave a great dinner, and the order of the meal, the magnificence of the
dishes, the excellence of the wines, put the height to the astonishment of
attorney, who had no idea that the same man could spend his days
in the debris and rubble, and return at night to an interior so
comfortable, not to say so luxurious.

Finally, M. Divorne left enchanted, making his son promise to
come every year at least once to spend a few days in Lannion.

"Decidedly," he said to his wife, when he returned, "our son is
in a very good position.

One can judge of Madame Divorne's delight.

"No doubt," she said to herself, "Pascal will soon be thinking of getting married, and
it's up to me to look for a young girl worthy of having such a husband.

The same idea, more or less, had occurred to Jean Lantier.--If I could
marry one of my daughters to the engineer, what happiness for her,
what an honor for me: to have in my family a man who was the
first at the School of Bridges and Roads! We will have to see. I have three
girls who will soon be of age, they are pretty, well brought up... my
faith! I will give him the choice.

Thus, from three sides at once, Pascal's freedom was threatened; him
hardly suspected it.




IV


The visit of Mr. Divorne, two trips to Brittany to embrace his
mother, such were, for six years, that is to say, until the year
last, the greatest events of Pascal's life.

That is to say the calm of his life, the regularity of his habits. All the
pleasures were within his reach, he had what so often lacks in
youth, money and freedom, but he did not abuse them. The devil
had become a hermit before he was old. Never did a young man live again
far from the stupid and unmentionable pleasures where rush with fury
young finance, the billon currency of the big contractors of the past century,
and the grotesque phalanx of hooligans, an idiotic troop aiming at vices
princes of self-conceit and attains nothing but ridicule. Without being the ideal
of virtue, Pascal would have deserved well from a mother-in-law.

But we shouldn't give him too much credit for this wisdom.
copy. Much of the praise should go to Lorilleux, who
watched over his friend with the solicitude of a mother, not over his son,
but on his daughter. Night and day, Argus with a hundred eyes always open,
the doctor stood guard around his future brother-in-law. He would have
returned points to the dragon who was sentry in front of the door of the
garden of the Hesperides, and whom Hercules killed in his sentry box, as much for
steal apples only to teach the sentries a great lesson at
to come.

Once or twice Pascal almost had a somewhat serious affair. It is 
while the doctor showed all his skill. He was the man
small means; little tricks, little tricks, he never backed down
nothing to jump through. If he exceeded the bounds of strict
Honesty, he didn't really care. Pascal was for him a deposit
which he had to account for. He defended it with the conscience of a
scrupulous trustee, and with so much address that he awoke no one
suspicion, or so he thought.

What Lorilleux especially dreaded was seeing his friend go away.
in the world. Parisian balls are covered with cobwebs
hatched by mothers jealous of getting rid of their little girls, and
where the scatterbrained bachelors come to be taken. The young man at
married walks in the living rooms, in the middle of always set traps.
If he loses his head one evening, it's all over with him; he is badass,
coaxed, circumvented, stunned, taken, bound and married before having had the
time to recognize each other. He has not yet decided to take
woman, he is not yet sure of his choice, that he has already pronounced the
yes fatal.

The doctor knew all this very well, if not from experience, at least from
good source. So he did everything he could to prevent Pascal from
take advantage of the beautiful relationships he had and which opened up to him
swinging all the doors. Not wanting his friend to go into the
world where he could not always follow it, he made the world come to him.
Through her care, Pascal's living room became the center, the meeting point
of a group of men of his age, of agreeable society, of relations
safe, all remarkable in some way. Lorilleux had them
severely scrutinized before admitting them. None of them had
of sister to be married.

Pascal let it happen. He had noticed very well the small
maneuvers of the doctor, but he had not worried about it. It was
far from guessing the purpose. He would have known, that he wouldn't have left
appalled. Lonely people who know they are weak enough to give in to a
obsession, to sacrifice their will to the will of others, dread
tyranny; they know their irresolution, and everywhere believe they see
attacks on their freedom: these people, always floating between
the opinion of Peter and the opinion of Paul are terrible companions; to
least word, they raise the banner of independence, pose in
revolted, and end up going where you want. If they get married,
their wives wear under their crinoline the garment which in the household is
the privilege, it is claimed, of the stronger sex.

Lorilleux did not have to fight these little revolts about nothing.
Pascal was much too sure of his will to fear the influence
of others, and, far from resenting his friend, he was very touched by his
attention. This kind of life, moreover, was quite within his
tastes; he did not like going out, and yet he liked talking.
He was never so happy as when he had four or five vouchers
comrades, and it happened almost every night, to the great despair
of the doorman who, especially on rainy days, found it very bad that we
dared to bring so many people up waxed stairs.

All the rest of Pascal's time was taken up with his work, including
the importance grew day by day. It was enough for everything, going down
effortlessly down to the smallest details. We never live entrepreneur more
active, and this fever of activity, he had the art of communicating it to
everyone around him. He knew how to recognize zeal, and
never skimped; he distrusted ruinous economies. Also its
employees did not spare themselves, and never wasted their time;
certain of receiving double pay if they did double work,
they threw themselves into the task like people who see a profit in the end
assured. Thus, he obtained such prodigious results, that the confreres
rivals wondered if he was a bit of a wizard. They were digging
head looking for a very simple thing: Pascal knew how to make himself loved
and sacrificing a 1,000-franc note.

After demolishing well, the two partners had approached "the building,"
thorny speculation, where the most skilful is liable to be mistaken. But in
that too they were happy, because they had reasoned justly.

Pascal and Lantier, without needing a book of statistics, knew
that the number of rich people, in Paris as elsewhere, is very limited.
They did their calculations on that. Unfortunately, our lords
owners, amiable holders of capital, are not yet
convinced of this unfortunate truth. Their architects do not build
more than palaces, sumptuous residences with sculpted balconies,
marble-paved vestibules. The first floor is intended for
millionaires, and you have to have some intelligence with the Bank to
live in the attic. We tell these stubborn people that they are wrong
road, that the number of those who can put more than 1,000 ecus to
their rent is not great: lost words and sorrows.

Later, when these palaces have found no other inhabitant than a
sullen and insolent doorman, when the signs have
terms weathered the rain and wind without bringing a tenant, so
the sad owners of these unproductive monuments will listen to the
complaints of their injured purse. With great reinforcement of partitions, they
will divide and subdivide their magnificent apartments; but they
will not turn them into comfortable lodgings, and even then they will be forced to
rent them very expensive. Many will ruin themselves in this profession, and that without
doubt will make you think; they will renounce the palaces, and return to the
houses.

More modest and more sensible, Pascal and his associate contented themselves with
build habitable dwellings. An honest man who had children
and less than twenty thousand pounds of income,--it is in this case--y
could lodge. Also, barely finished, they were rented from the cellar
attic, at reasonable prices, quite advantageous however, for
make the invested money sweat seven or eight per cent, a profit which is not
not to be despised.

Such houses, so easily rented, sold more easily
Again. The festive bouquet that Masons place on the last
chimney didn't have time to fade as buyers
were presenting. Pascal was making a name for himself among serious architects, and
the social capital grew visibly.

This constant happiness, due to a great deal of skill and know-how,
teased Lorilleux prodigiously. For lack of knowing how to explain it, he
consoled himself by repeating that banal refrain, paved with which fools who
stay on the way knock out successful people of spirit:

--He is lucky.

And he, Lorilleux, had no luck, he recognized it, not without
bitterness. A patient sower, he reaped nothing, contrary to what
promises the gospel. Every morning he was awakened by some little
disappointment; every day he found in his clever combinations
a calculation error. And instead of taking it out on him, he was taking it out on him
events; as if all skill did not consist in this:
dominate events, or at least make them turn to his liking.
advantage.

The doctor had dreamed of fame and fortune, and fame and fortune
seemed to run away from him. His name was still obscure, and his biggest
client was a retired druggist who, since living in the country
and breathed clean air, could not breathe.

So, imperceptibly, Lorilleux's character had soured; his 
complexion had taken on that bilious tone which is the livery of envy; he
became tyrannical, touchy, snappy. He took things to the worst,
and no longer hid his hatred or his contempt for men. Everywhere he
saw the intriguers and the cheats more skilful than he, and he
lamented his lack of address.

The doctor had other worries which disturbed his sleep and
darkened his forehead. Pascal was going to be decidedly very rich.
This fortune, which had come so quickly that it had disconcerted all his
predictions, worried him horribly. Wouldn't it be an obstacle? HAS
consider only experience, Pascal, with twenty thousand pounds of
annuities, must have been much less disinterested than when he was
relatively poor. He who once, with each happy speculation of his
friend, rubbed his hands thinking of his sister, he was reduced to
wish him some nice little bankruptcy that would chip his
capital.

He reproached himself bitterly for having waited so long and resolved to unmask
his batteries, not all at once, but with a wise slowness.

Unmask is the right word. No one in the world could suspect the
intentions of Lorilleux; even his mother was not in the confidence. This
profound diplomat had never revealed his secret. Her
sister, as well as her friend, lovingly ignored this project
caressed for fourteen years. And what a secret! a lifelong dream.

With a prudence beyond his age, Lorilleux had taken good care
to admit his friend into the intimacy of his family. He guessed that a
marriage is almost impossible between two young people who have grown up
whole. Seeing each other every day can only lead to a sweet and
brotherly friendship. Thanks to clever precautions, miss
Lorilleux and Pascal had barely glimpsed each other on rare occasions,
arranged with infinite art. They hadn't spoken to each other in all ten
time.

It was now up to the doctor to put the young people in
presence. Serious business; yet it seemed to him that all the
difficulties, except this accursed fortune, were ironed out. Pascal was going
thirty years old, he was endowed with all those external advantages which
seduce a woman. Mademoiselle Lorilleux was eighteen years old,
she was remarkably pretty, dark, and ravishing in grace and
distinction. She owed her brother a much higher education.
serious than is usually that of women. Finally, this brother
far-sighted and rigid had applied himself to breaking the will of the young
daughter, exaggerating her tyranny at pleasure, thus preparing her for happy
days for the time when she would find a yoke less harsh than hers.

When the doctor considered them both, this friend surrounded by so many
care, this sister so tenderly loved, he could not help
marvel and applaud his work, so much did he find them
well made for each other. He united them in thought,
settled into the household, and the happiness he saw them enjoy
was his reward.

Determined to hasten the outcome, Lorilleux understood that above all he
had to gradually accustom Pascal to the idea of marriage, to make it
to desire. It was a matter of time. Again, in this preparatory work,
the doctor had, without suspecting it, two powerful auxiliaries. Mrs.
Divorne did not want to have searched and found an heiress in vain,
a daughter-in-law after her own heart. In all her letters she
slipped, next to a eulogy of its Breton pearl, some delicate
matrimonial reference. Jean Lantier, like a true goldsmith, repeated without
cease that a man was quite mad to resign himself to living alone, when there
has around the world so many charming young ladies who have received the
best of educations in the most renowned boarding schools in
Paris; model schools, where the least intelligent of the students
quickly learns to make three toilets a day.

But Lorilleux, through his daily relations with Pascal,
could act much more directly. He had found to indoctrinate his
friend a rather ingenious little combination. He had pretended to be
himself suffering from matrimonial addiction. Thanks to this detour, he could
say, his insinuations can only be regarded as the
outpourings of trusting friendship.

Also, as he said well the bitterness of loneliness, the sadness
celibacy! As he sang the sweetness of marriage, the chaste
happiness of two souls who understand each other and whose union has been sanctified
by the Church and recognized by law.

Then he would happily detail the "determining causes" that
were deciding. A man must marry young. Isn't it madness
to wait to choose a companion until the hour of decadence? So do
those shameless old men who seem less looking for a wife than a
nurse.

What do these bring to the chaste young girl they lead to
the altar, in exchange for his treasures of youth and candor? A heart
extinguished, a withered imagination, a worn body, ruins, fragments of
all kinds. Also, what fate awaits them! You have to see inside
these households, one year after signing the contract. Ah! that we are no longer
sensible a thousand times in England, in America, in Germany! There, each
marry the woman he loves, and marry her for herself. None of these
shameful considerations which, in France, make marriage a
speculation, a matter of money coldly discussed by
notaries, and whose conclusion depends on a figure in total. In these
happy country, it is not the dowry that attracts the bridegrooms; also,
all young girls marry, rich or poor, provided they
be beautiful and kind; there are only the ugly to comb holy
Catherine, and even when they can't save their face at
strength of good qualities.

Thus spoke Lorilleux with the eloquence of conviction. Each day,
to reproduce these few ideas, he invented a new form.
To describe the enchantments of the honeymoon, it became almost
poet. One would have thought that every morning he studied, for the
paraphrase in the evening, a few pages of this friendly and ingenious book
who, after having made the reputation and the fortune of Mr. Legouvé the father,
was not without contributing to the literary successes and fame of
Mr. Legouvé the son.

Pascal listened distractedly to all these remarks. When
Lorilleux, after having described the woman of his dreams, that is to say after
having made the portrait of his sister, exclaimed:

--Yes, it's decided, the day I find this woman, I'm getting married.

"Marry yourself," answered Pascal simply.

At that time, the doctor needed great strength of character not to
tell his friend:

--Well! and you?

But already two or three times the young engineer had come
in front of this question, always hanging on the lips of Lorilleux.

"I will most likely marry," he said, "like everyone else, but
I am young enough to still wait. I find myself very happy as
that I am; loneliness does not weigh me down in any way. Moreover, to our
time, a woman is a luxury still beyond my means. It's necessary
truly fortune to him who does not feel the useful courage to
consider the dowry above all; and I want to be able to choose without
worry about money.

If Pascal's lack of haste distressed Lorilleux, at least he was
delighted with his disinterestedness. And God knows if he approved of it!

"A wife should take everything from her husband," he said.

But deep in his heart he cursed the women who brought the
men to think like this: "A woman is a luxury, you have to be rich to
to marry." Yet it is this distressing maxim that peoples the
convents. Ten coquettes make a hundred spinsters. For a woman who
ruins her husband, fifty men swear to live and die
singles.

At least Lorilleux's persistence had been quick to produce
excellent effects. His marriage mania had become one of the texts
conversation favorites of friends who almost every night
met at Pascal's. He had sown an idea, it was germinating, it
was soon to bear fruit.

In groups of young people, it is rare that this is not the case:
that only one decides, the others very quickly manage to share his
desires. The eternal story of Panurge's sheep.

In the meantime, we joked about the doctor; it was who would tease him,
affecting to caress his fad.

"Doctor," said one, "I have your case: one hundred and twenty thousand francs and
hopes. I saw the portrait of the fortune of the parents at a
notary.

--Lorilleux, asserted another, I saw a stone's throw from Pascal's, in
Badié's watch, the photograph of a charming young girl; she
will suit you, go and ask for his address...

Unusually, the doctor took jokes very well.

"Parbleu," he replied, "you must all have my business, we have
always the affair of a well-placed man who wishes to marry; unhappiness
is that he is only offered young girls he is suitable for
very well, but which do not suit him at all.

And quietly, Lorilleux said to himself: "Come on, my friends, come on, laugh at your
easy! The trainer brings his horse back a thousand times, if necessary
the obstacle he wants him to cross, and the horse ends up jumping.
You will all jump, which I care very little about; but also Pascal
will jump, and that's what I want.

This is where the Machiavellian Lorilleux was in his scholarly progress,
when one evening one of the friends arrived carrying the most seductive
proposals.

This friend, while laughing, had taken the matter seriously; he is silent
inquired of a good match near five or six old ladies of his
acquaintance, and it didn't take long to find what he wanted.
So he had come to offer Lorilleux to introduce him. Seeing does not commit to anything.

The doctor listened very attentively to the details given to him,
some objections, and ends up refusing.

"That man is too difficult at last," said one of the young men,
we will never marry him. If he don't wanna die boy, there's
more than a resource, M. de Saint-Roch, the providence of bachelors.

There is certainly no one who has not at least heard of this
eccentric and mysterious character. He is called
the family ambassador. He prides himself on having invented the
_matrimonial profession_, and prides himself on having made marriage a
new luster, when it was very close to falling into the
disrepute.

Also, the proposal made to Lorilleux to contact this able man
had a smash of laughs. The doctor didn't flinch.

--Why no? he said very seriously. But I would like to know before
whether M. de Saint-Roch has ever married anyone?

"How, unhappy man," replied the author of the motion, "you have
the audacity to doubt? Haven't you ever read a newspaper in your life? Open
the first comer, you will be edified. The famous ambassador does not disdain
not to praise, from time to time, the fourth page of the big five
newspapers. This is where he shines in his glory. He announces to the families
that he has at their disposal a rich assortment of young ladies and
widowed ladies, from sixteen to sixty years old, all adorned with the advantages
most wanted socials, spirit, beauty, birth, and embellished with
a few million dots.

--Oh! resumed Lorilleux, I know all that perfectly. I read that Mr.
of Saint-Roch is honored by the trust of the first families of the
nobility, magistracy, army and finance. I read that
all the princely houses of Europe have the habit of soliciting
his good offices; I also know that it is necessary to write legibly
address, but all that did not convince me. So I come back to my
question: Has he ever married anyone?

"But, doctor, in Paris alone there are at least a dozen
marriage brokers.

--What does this prove?

--That they wouldn't have a store if they didn't have practices.

--I have seen stores with no practices.

"Finally, do you believe, dear Aesculapius, that it is solely for his
pleasure and his glory that the inventor of the matrimonial profession
spends a hundred thousand francs a year renting out the fourth pages of
newspapers?

This last reason seemed conclusive to Lorilleux, he confessed
convinced. But the conversation continued on the chapter. Who Mr. of
Did Saint-Roch marry, where, how? What were his methods? So much
questions that none of the friends could solve.

--Well! gentlemen, said one of them at last, I must confess to you a
weakness, ten times I was on the point of writing to M. de Saint-Roch.

--And why? great gods! asked the doctor.

--Out of curiosity.

"Faith," said Pascal, "I had the same idea; this man intrigues me.

"Then," objected Lorilleux, "you must not write, but go there yourself."

--In fact, that would be more interesting and instructive.

"Since that's the way it is," continued Pascal, laughing, "I'll satisfy at once
your curiosity and mine, I will find the mysterious man.

"It's really a fine project," said the doctor, shrugging his shoulders.
I recognize you there.

--Would you see any inconvenience there?

--Oh! none in truth, if it may amuse you. I only find
that it is improper to go to a man with the intention of
make fun of him. This childishness is hardly our age anymore.

Silence was imposed on this spoilsport.

"It's agreed," said the friends, "Pascal is going to explore; if he's
satisfied, we all immediately give our clientele to Mr.
Saint Roch.




V


The founder of the matrimonial profession occupies the entire first floor
of a magnificent house located at the corner of two of the most beautiful streets in
Chaussée-d'Antin district.

His apartment has no less than sixteen front windows, and the rich
curtains seen from outside give passers-by a lofty idea of
inside.

The choice of this house alone is a masterstroke. His situation him
gives two entrances on different streets. Two staircases lead
at the negotiator's, and again, if you look carefully, you will find
minus a back stairway and a dark hallway leading to a
third street.

In his announcements, Mr. de Saint-Roch makes these three
issues, pledges of incognito for the practices. He is not proud, and
does not want its visitors to be announced by trumpet.
Finally, as if to prepare excuses, pretexts, for men too
although for women, a well-known milliner occupies the third floor,
while on the second floor there remains a banker whose crowns clink
in the stairs. Three times a happy omen!

This mysterious house probably has a doorman, two doormen rather,
since there are two doors, but no one has ever seen them. There are
two lodges, but never at the crossroads of one or the other
a sullen head; never does a cheeky voice cry out to visitors: "Where
are you going?" This question could be embarrassing.

Signs with gold letters on a black lacquer background replace
advantageously absent doormen. They take so to speak
stranger by the hand, follow him all the way up the stairs, and the
drive where he wants to go: to the banker, to the milliner, where
in men at weddings.

In this blessed house, on one side or the other, one enters as
at home. This is how Pascal entered it. Guided by index hands
drawn on the wall, he climbed the stairs. On the landing of
first floor give three doors; on all three, in letters
brilliant, we read the illustrious name of the matrimonial ambassador.

Pascal rang at random at one of these entrances. The bell was still vibrating
the door opened, and he found himself face to face with a superb
domestic, more golden on the edge than a Swiss cathedral.

--M. from Saint-Roch? Pascal asked.

"If Monsieur will take the trouble to follow me," replied
respectfully the magnificent valet, I will lead sir.

And pushing aside a damask door, he preceded the young man in a
hallway lit by frosted glass. A thick carpet deafened the
sound of footsteps.

As he walked, Pascal laughed; he was thinking of the claims of the negotiator
which depict his house in a fantastic aspect: doors
mysterious, hidden stairs, dark corridors, nothing is missing;
perhaps, however, servants should be deaf and dumb.

Finally, the servant ushered the visitor into a small living room
of soft lilac reps, of a bold shade.

"If monsieur wants to take the trouble to sit down," he said, "I will
warn sir.

And at the same time he knocked three times on a stamp placed in the middle
of the table.

--Will I have to wait a long time?

--Monsieur has been informed that monsieur is waiting for him in the lilac salon,
replied the servant, bowing. Mister will not be long in coming
find sir.

He bowed again and quietly withdrew, quietly closing
the door.

--Devil! thought Pascal, it seems that there are salons of all
colors, here; let's still review this one.

This lilac living room is, truth be told, a marvel of misunderstanding luxury
and richness in bad taste. A saleswoman in the toilet would be there
glare. Everything is golden, from the arms of the armchairs to
the ceiling rose. The upholstery of the furniture is embroidered by hand; he
is not one that resembles the other. The character rug is the
masterpiece of the grotesque: it must represent the toilet of Madame
de Pompadour, or something else, only the author of the cartoon can know what.

The rest is in keeping. But what gives the lilac living room a
particular physiognomy, it is the number of paintings of all kinds
hung on the paneling, and the incredible profusion of small objects
arranged on the fireplace, on the tables, on four or five shelves.

Bronzes, plasters, marbles, porcelains, carved woods, there is everything.
Only a bric-a-brac store can give an idea of this clutter
of art objects. And what works of art! Unheard-of, prodigious things,
statuettes to thrill, paintings to shiver. A voucher
painting, three mediocre, some bronzes from Barbedienne,
would find favor; but everything else...

Pascal, horrified, went from one object to another. Under every trinket there
had a label and motto; it read: To our good friend.--To
the author of my happiness.--Remembrance of a happy mother.--Pledge of
recognition, etc., etc.

Obviously all these works of art were donations, but from whom? The subject
of the clock was a chubby Love blowing with all his lungs on
a brazier. Below the Cupid, we had engraved with a chisel: "Thus will be
always our flame!..."

M. de Saint-Roch's new client lost himself in conjectures.

He was there, amazed, in front of this Love and this flame, when a door
opened quietly, and the matrimonial ambassador himself appeared on the
threshold.

He is a chubby, plump and fresh little man to please. The
lilies and roses that perfumers sell in small jars
bloom on his scrupulously shaved cheek. Her heart-shaped mouth,
who smiles like a bouquet at Chloris, discovers a case of fine pearls
and white, the last word in the art of the dentist. His eye has her tender
gaiety of a madrigal.

Coquettish, neat, musky, it exhales the most penetrating scents. Does he
a movement, a gesture, it's like a sachet being shaken. He has the graces
juveniles of a Watteau shepherd, and precious poses to delight
the heart. Vestris would have liked it for the way it arches the leg, it's
the god Minuet in person.

His transparent waistcoat is a souvenir of the first empire. It's him
who will wear out the last of the cornflower-blue coats, with chased gold buttons,
long, slender peplums. He gave up the shorts, but
loops of brilliants adorn the fine beaver pumps that
imprison his big feet. Malines cuffs half hide
his chubby, hairy hands.

He has a passion for jewelry. His whole person shines and sparkles
like the sky of a December night. Rings are put on all her
fingers. Does he open his coat, one thinks one sees the shop of a
goldsmith. Pins, buttons, sparkles, spangle his tie, his
shirt and its jabot. Chains of gold fall in triple cascades on
along the folds of his waistcoat. He never has less than three watches on
him; their charms would form a museum. He doesn't wear curls
ears, but her blond, curly wig is a poem.

Such he appeared radiant on the threshold of the salon, and Pascal was dazzled.

The matrimonial ambassador did not seem too proud of the effect he
was producing. His vanity on this point must be jaded. But as the
surprise of the new client strongly resembled exaggerated shyness, he
began to reassure him. Also, is it with an enchanting voice that he
modulated these simple words:

"You were, I see, sir, in contemplation before my poor
ex voto.

--Ex voto! echoed Pascal like an echo.

"If I use that expression," continued the illustrious negotiator,
is that I owe recognition to all the objects you see
here. It was thinking of me that friendly hands embroidered these
armchairs; these bronzes, these paintings, are for me the pledges of a
unforgettable memory.

Pascal bowed. He lacked words to paint his
stupefaction.

"So," continued the matrimonial ambassador in a tender voice, "I like
to surround myself with these pious gifts. They are my dearest treasure, the
most precious reward of my labours. But all is not here, I
please believe it. I have seven other living rooms still, just as crowded
that this one.

"Monsieur," said Pascal, "you have, I see, married a lot of people.

"A third of France, approximately," replied M. de Saint-Roch with an air of
modest. Many hardly suspect it, many have forgotten me.

--Is it possible?

--That is so, at least. Ah! sir, and tenderness seemed
to win over the ambassador, I have done many ungrateful people! They have slandered my
intentions so pure, I have been sued. But I have stops and
judgments in my favour, by me they have been printed, with the
pleadings of the ten lawyers. I have consultations that confirm the
morality and legality of my actions! I still have... But all these
presents that you see here are they not the most eloquent of
pleadings, the most glorious panegyric...

"Monsieur," tried Pascal, "it never occurred to me to dispute...

"Fortunately," continued M. de Saint-Roch, "there are not only ingrates
in this world. Here, this little group you see there was me this morning
sent by a young couple that I married last year. I have this painting
to two newlyweds whose union I negotiated four years ago. Ah!
those give me great satisfaction; they are on their fifth
child, it's a girl, and they chose me as their godfather. That of
couples have kept my memory in their hearts! they write to me,
they inform me of everything that happens to them that is happy.....
a little dispute in the household, they take me as arbitrator, and
I soon restored peace.

"These are facts which honor a man.

"And a profession, sir." Ah! if the hours were not so
short, I would like, after having lit the torch of marriage,
maintain its flame always pure and brilliant. What would it take to
that? A home insurance against domestic quarrels. spouses
submit their petty grievances to a jury of people from the
two sexes. Judgment rendered, skilful negotiators would make heard
reason to that of the spouses who is in the wrong. But, sorry, I'm abusing
of your moments, sir; so please take the trouble to pass in
my office.

And the surprising man stood aside in front of Pascal, to let him pass,
with the flexible grace of a posture teacher.

The office of M. de Saint-Roch resembles all laboratories
possible business. To the dirtiness, to the dust, a solicitor
would feel at home. But the servants of the negotiator hunt for
spiders, and carefully wipe the golden leather of the many boxes
that line the room.

The matrimonial ambassador condescended, with his hand, to move an armchair to his
young client, and he himself sat down in front of a large desk loaded with
papers and folders adorned with pink strings.

"Monsieur," said Pascal then, "I came to find you because I
want to get married.

"Good, sir, good, very good! answered M. de Saint-Roch, here is a
good thought. Marriage, sir, is the true end of man. I
then tell you about it, I who alone have the right to tell me his
renovator. God and I said to man: Take a companion. And if
I myself am not a father, it is that I exercise a priesthood
thrice holy. I am vowed to celibacy, like the confessor. I wear
in me too many secrets not to fear and flee the presence of a
beloved woman.

--So I have complete confidence.

"Loyalty and discretion, sir, is my motto. Ah! you have a thousand
times right to come to me. How are they, please?
weddings around the world? I'm not talking about exceptions. They make themselves
by chance, by a friend, a relative, a simple acquaintance. The old
women ordinarily have a rage to marry people. Oh! the old
women! But what guarantees do you have, what control? You are marrying
confidence, eyes closed. If you are delicate, we exploit your
delicacy; you were promised mountains of gold, you are given nothing.
But you're committed, false shame holds you back, you're furious,
but you dare not say: No.

Pascal made a gesture of denial.

--Oh! resumed M. de Saint-Roch, I know there are exceptions. But
Finally, at home, never a surprise, never a disappointment. What honors
my acts, sir, what sets them apart is that you can
always have your notary verify the exhibits and documents that I
provided; and this, without being committed. That's where my reputation stems from
offline...

"That's very good, sir," interrupted Pascal, "but wouldn't it be
time to get back to my business?

--Here we are; but I wanted, my dear customer, to give you these
necessary explanations.

And with that, Pascal's interrogation began. Name, occupation,
family, residence, fortune, character, intimate details, the negotiator in
weddings forgot nothing. He was taking notes as the young
man answered. When he had run out of questions:

--Now, my dear client, he said, you can rest easy,
we'll find the shoe for you, and that, before long.

"How," replied Pascal, surprised, before long; but i thought that
it would be right away...

--Oh! said the ambassador, who seemed extremely shocked, like you
go! Ah! boiling youth, he continued in a playful tone, you
believe that a marriage is made like this...

-- Sorry, I was guessing...

"That I had there, in a box, a wife to present to you?" But
let's talk seriously. Today is Thursday, come back Wednesday
next, I will take care of you.

M. de Saint-Roch rose with these words, the audience was over. At this
Moment four strokes on a gong sounded.

--Ah! said the ambassador, someone is waiting for me in the pink room.

"Then," said Pascal, "see you Wednesday."

And he walked towards the door. M. de Saint-Roch restrained him.

"Not that way, not that way," he said. Plague! you might meet
someone. We must not meet anyone at my house, the house is
arranged accordingly. I would receive twenty people there at a time,
everyone would feel alone. Over here, come.

And, opening a door concealed by boxes, he handed Pascal to the
hands of a servant, who led him, through a rather dark corridor,
Until the street.

That same evening, Pascal recounted, without omitting the slightest detail, his
visit to the negotiator. Never has a story had greater success. But
was only a first act, and everyone urged the young engineer to
push the adventure. Lorilleux himself, that the exhortations
the ambassador's matrimonial weddings had greatly delighted, was of this opinion.

Pascal was therefore faithful to the rendezvous. This time we made him wait
in an apple-green living room, except for the exact color of the
first. He had no time to get impatient. M. de Saint-Roch appeared
almost immediately.

But how different was this second reception from the first!
Pascal was welcomed like an eagerly awaited son,
the ambassador did not know what party to give him.

--Well! he said to her, I thought of you. Ah! you are a young man
very honest, and I owe you congratulations: why all my
customers not like you?

-- How so, in what?

--Hey! you are too modest, my dear child, you have hidden a
part of your fortune. What were you saying to me, that your father has
ten thousand livres a year and a study worth forty thousand francs?
His study is worth thirty thousand crowns, and he has almost twenty thousand
pension books. His only farm in Kerpris brings in twelve thousand francs
per year. It has magnificent woods near Guingamp, and superb meadows
along the Trieux.

Never was a man more amazed than Pascal on hearing these details.
How! a stranger knew his stuff better than himself? From where
the devil did M. de Saint-Roch know these details?

--That's not all, continued the founder of the profession.
marriage, you announced a personal fortune of three hundred thousand
francs; you have much better than that. Doctor Lorilleux says
everywhere that you have double, but your partner, Mr. Lantier, calculates
out of four hundred and fifty thousand francs.

--Morbleu! sir, said Pascal, where do you know all that?

--Hey! hey! laughed M. de Saint-Roch, "we went to inquire."

--Sir!

--Won't you get angry? Ah, do you believe that I marry the
people without knowing what I'm doing? It would be a nice job, really!
Know that I am not unaware of any detail of the existence of my clients. I
know all the peculiarities of your life better than your best
friend, Doctor Lorilleux. So I could tell you what you him
have hidden: for example, why you resigned
six years.

--Oh! for it!...

--Hey! dear customer, you withdrew because you had to be
appointed in the provinces, and that at no price, at this time, you did not want
leave Paris, at no cost! Some affair of the heart...

Pascal turned crimson. He was almost afraid.
a sorcerer, this man, or an employee of the police headquarters." He
greatly regretted his step, and was very close to getting angry.

"I know that it was all over long ago," added M. de Saint-Roch.
Besides, have no anxiety; my house, I told you, is a
confessional. Afraid of the immense responsibility that weighs on me,
never, by discretion, I did not train any pupil. I will take my
secrets at the tomb; cabinet, titles, notes, correspondence, everything will die
with me, and then the matrimonial profession will fall back into childhood
and disrepute.

He pronounced these last words in a moved voice, his painted face
expressed deep pain. Pascal did not know if he should laugh or
get angry. Was he a charlatan or a convinced man? "--What
actor!" thought the young man. Gradually however the usual smile
returned to the lips of the singular man.

"Now let's talk about you," he said. You are young, pretty boy,
spiritual, rich, you are very easy to marry, the business will be quickly
done. Answer me as your confessor: Are you getting married by
speculation, do you want a lot of money?

--Money is a beautiful thing, I don't despise it, but I want to love
the woman I will marry.

--Well! you are right. Sometimes I'm forced to lend myself to
speculation, but it still annoys me. So we say a
fortune which corresponds to yours, a woman whom you can love.

--You said it.

M. de Saint-Roch rose, and, taking an enormous ledger, opened it on
his office.

"I have there," he said, knocking on the register, "there, the richest
fortunes of France and various countries, always with supporting titles.

Pascal came forward to take a look at this directory of all
the heiresses of Europe.

--Oh! you can look, said the ambassador, you won't understand
nothing. All my registers are written in hieroglyphic characters, and
I alone have the key.

As he spoke, he leafed through his ledger:

"Fifteen hundred thousand francs is too much. A hundred thousand francs, not enough.
There, one must be a noble, a baron at least; here, we want a soldier; there's
has unique parents! Ah! here, perhaps: a million in cash,
a widow, fifty-three years old...

-- Much obliged.

-- Let's look again. Here, we want the husband to continue to manage a
made. This lady demands that the man she takes does not smoke
not; requirements and no dowry! This other will only marry a blond, and
you are brown; good luck though. Ah! one of my best
clients, she remarried three times, always through my care:
twenty-nine years, five children...

--Let's go...

"Perhaps here is your case: two hundred thousand francs, eighteen years,
excellent education, honorable parents...

--That could be fine.

--Especially since I'm giving you the cash figure. There are beautiful
hopes, very beautiful, superb. The mother is old, her health is
deplorable, you understand... and all fortune is on his side.
As for the young girl, she is very pretty, my faith! large, well made,
blonde hair. If it is necessary to say everything, I believe him to have an unequal character, the
servants never stay more than two months in that house.

--Devil!

--Yes, when you get married, it's for longer. The parents
will demand that their son-in-law stay with them...

--So thanks. Then, I have to tell you, I don't like blondes.

--Very good! And M. de Saint-Roch continued his review. Ah! for once,
he exclaimed, here we are. The lady is charming, yes, charming,
and brunette. She's twenty, and she's never gone to boarding school. excellent
education however, the mother is a bit strict. The young person has
the best character, she is kind, lively, playful, a little childish
perhaps; but she is not coquettish and knows how to keep a house. the
father is a former manufacturer from Roubaix, retired three years ago, a
brave and excellent man, in no way teasing. Great fortune, my faith! in
buildings, please, well close to a million. They will give a hundred
thousand crowns.

--Let's stop, said Pascal, it seems to me difficult to find better.

--Is not it? Certainly the lady will please you. For example, I
cannot guarantee you, to the nearest fifty thousand francs, the figure of the
dowry. The father is a little tight.

"Never mind, I have told you my pretensions. I am not demanding.
And now, what is the name of this girl, when will I see her?

--Patience, you will know his name when necessary; we won't delay
you present. We only have one more formality to complete, the
easiest in the world.

M. de Saint-Roch then presented a small piece of paper to his new client,
asking him to please sign it.

Pascal undertook therein to count to the matrimonial ambassador five for
cent on the dowry, the day after his marriage to Mademoiselle...

The name was blank.

"Here is the bottom of the bag," thought Pascal. Should I sign? Bah! I do not believe
not that this signature can ever cost me a penny." And, from his
finest handwriting, he traced his name at the bottom of the paper.

M. de Saint-Roch took up the pen in his turn. He put his signature next to
that of Pascal. Then, in the blank left in place of the name of the
young girl, he wrote: Antoinette Gerbeau.

"Antoinette," said Pascal. This name pleases me enough.

"It is a happy omen," replied M. de Saint-Roch graciously;
you will hear from me soon.

He then threw his client out with the same precautions as the
first time.

The details of this second interview still greatly amused the friends.
of the young engineer, except towards the end. The episode of the paper to sign their
seemed inappropriate. The businessman in this pierced too much under the coat
blue-barbel of the salesman of the hymen. Almost all said
that they would certainly not have forgotten their signature in this mysterious
laboratory, and they declared that M. de Saint-Roch would not have their
practice.

Lorilleux took advantage of these provisions to return to his sheep and
repeat, with more assurance, than ever the matrimonial ambassador
had married no one. We shared his opinion, and we hired him, since he
was still determined to take a wife, to go elsewhere.




VII


It had been three days since, for the last time, as he believed,
Pascal had greeted M. de Saint-Roch; he no longer thought much of
the matrimonial ambassador, when one evening, as he came home, his
servant handed him a letter brought in the morning.

Pascal broke the seal and read:

"Dear Sir and Customer,

"I have just received notice that an excellent opportunity is
present for you to see Mademoiselle Gerbeau. my great friend
the Chevalier de Jeuflas will pick you up this evening at nine o'clock
precise. He will be happy to drive you to a ball where you
meet this lady.

"I would be sorry if my letter did not reach you in time,
perhaps we shall never find such an opportunity so soon,
the young person going out little.

"Consider me, I beg you, sir and dear client, as the
most devoted of your friends.

"J.-D. OF SAINT-ROCH."

--Devil! said Pascal to himself, at nine o'clock! It is half past eight
past, I only have time to flee if I want to avoid the character.

But at the same moment the servant announced:

--Monsieur le Chevalier de Jeuflas.

The knight is a man of the best world, amiable, polite, distinguished.
It would be difficult to assign him an age, he must be between thirty
and sixty-five years old.

What can be seen at first glance is that it has an excellent
tailor. Two or three orders, including a light brown one, bloom at its
buttonhole. He squints slightly as he speaks.

M. de Jeuflas did not seem at all embarrassed to introduce himself in this way.
to a stranger. He greeted Pascal graciously.

"Monsieur," he said, "one of my good friends, who holds you in high esteem.
singular, your desire to go out into the world told me. I will stand
for very honored to present in the few houses where I am received
a man as distinguished as you.

The pose, the gesture, the tone, everything was perfect. This is what noticed
Pascal while profusely apologizing. He explained that, having since returned
only a few minutes, he had been warned only at the moment of the
arrival of the knight. In fact, although very intrigued, he hesitated to
follow M. de Saint-Roch's friend.

"I'm not ready, sir," he added, "and I'm afraid of abusing
of your kindness...

--Oh! Never mind, answered the knight, there is no hurry for us,
and I can very well wait for you.

Curiosity triumphed, and Pascal, after a few
follow M. de Jeuflas. To make him be patient while he
would dress, he offered her cigars; but the knight refused, although
amateur, he confessed, of good cigars, because he never smoked
when he had to go to a salon where there were women.

While dressing, Pascal said to himself:

"Where the devil does M. de Saint-Roch get such accomplices?" That he's
is very good. There are only gentlemen and hairdressers left,
fear of reeking of tobacco when they come to a woman;
evidently the knight is a gentleman. Come on, the plot
complicated.

The knight had his carriage. When he was installed there next to
Pascal:

"Tonight," he said, "we are going to see an old magistrate, strong in
my friends, which gives two or three evening dances a winter. It's a
good and pleasant house, where you will enjoy yourself, I am sure.

From the way the mistress of the house received him, when M. de
Jeuflas would have presented it as one of his best and oldest
friends, Pascal saw clearly that the knight was indeed very
considered, and even more loved. To his recommendation alone he owed this
friendly and gracious welcome reserved for beloved guests.

As for the house, it was really what the friend of
the ambassador.

Pascal felt relieved of a fairly great anxiety. He had not
feared an insult, but he greatly feared being led into a world
at least equivocal.

The presentation over, M. de Jeuflas pulled his very new friend a little
apart.

"Look over there," he said to her in the most disinterested tone,
bench that touches the window, this pretty person, in the first row,
the third after the curtain. Yes, the. Isn't it, that she is
lovely? It's Mademoiselle Antoinette Gerbeau. I really like his
dad; his mother is the perfect model of all virtues. I am one of
their intimates.

He walked away with these words, leaving his young friend, as he said, to
his thoughts.

Pascal would have been very difficult if he had not agreed with the
knight. Mademoiselle Gerbeau was an admirable young girl. thick
brown hair framed her face with a charming expression, and
brought out the admirable whiteness of her complexion; his mouth was
mischievous and laughing, her big black eyes sparkled with mischief and
gaiety. We were waltzing at the time, and no doubt she regretted staying
in its place. From time to time, she turned to her mother, placed
behind her, as if to reproach her for having deprived her of a great
pleasure.

--"Mr. de Saint-Roch had not deceived me," thought Pascal. But at this
moment, in the presence of this young girl so beautiful, the memory of
the matrimonial ambassador embarrassed him; he would have liked to forget it and not
owe only to chance the pleasure of admiring this beauty so perfect.--"I
I'm always going to ask her to dance," he said to himself; and turning around
living room, skirting the benches to avoid the waltzers, he arrived
up to Mademoiselle Gerbeau.

She was engaged for all the quadrilles, except for the next one.
No one had thought to ask her, thinking she had it
promised. She was even a little worried about still doing tapestry during
a contredanse, after not having waltzed. Also Pascal was admirably
welcomed, not because he was a man of intelligence and a handsome rider, but
only because he was the desired dancer.

Pascal did not like dancing; he found the modern quadrille a
very ridiculous entertainment, and yet the one he danced with
Mademoiselle Gerbeau seemed to him too short. It would have been, it is true,
very embarrassed to say why. His conversation with the girl
hadn't had anything endearing about it. He had, between the figures, whispered
some of those trifles which are the obligatory hors d'oeuvre of the
contredanse, and which each dancer puts in the pocket of his black coat
with her scarf. Mademoiselle Gerbeau had whispered very timidly
a few monosyllables, and that's all.

However, when the orchestra stopped, breathless from running after
the ritornellos, cut from the opera in vogue or from some
Beaumann's melody, he felt like shouting: Encore!

He had to escort his dancer to her place. While taking the
longer, to have the pleasure of feeling her lean on his arm
a few more minutes, he begged her to grant him a mazurque,
since she had promised all the quadrilles.

"I don't dance the mazurque, sir," she said with a little sad air.

"Please, Mademoiselle," insisted Pascal, "allow me to
solicit this favor in the presence of your mother; I am on
that she won't refuse me.

She raised her eyes to Pascal, and blushed to see herself divined. She
was burning to dance it, this seductive mazurque, but her mother was
inflexible. Very low, without having much hope in a step
repeated several times, she replied:

"I will, sir.

He is very eloquent, at least, this intriguing Pascal Divorne, my
friend; he showed it well. He immediately obtained the consent of Madame
Gerbeau. And it was not easy, because she has principles
arrested, very arrested, and does not leave it willingly. Until this day
she had sworn, in the knowledge of everyone, that never, ever,
his daughter would not join in those improper dances where a young man has
the right to embrace with his arm the waist of a young girl.

Yes, she had sworn it and shouted it from the rooftops; it was the first article
of the maternal charter granted on the day when, for the first time, she
drove his daughter to the ball. Everyone knew it well. As well
when we saw Mademoiselle Antoinette mazurker with this handsome young man
that no one knew, we thought there was something, and
that the happy dancer was a future husband.

Pascal was heroic; he danced with other young girls three or
four quadrilles, thus hoping to deserve a new mazurque. But
when, around two o'clock in the morning, he looked for Madame Gerbeau for him
extract a second consent, she had disappeared.

His spite was intense. He regretted having taken so much trouble to
nothing. Only then did he remember his introducer. He had some
hard to find out; at last he saw her in the gaming room.

The Chevalier de Jeuflas was seated at a side table. He was winning. This
was no longer the same man, his coldness had left him, his face
expressed a passionate, though restrained, joy. His gaze was
turned on and flashed tawny like the gold heaped up before him.

"So that's the secret!" thought Pascal, this man is a gambler. It is by
the game that M. de Saint-Roch holds. Poor man! what bondage!

On seeing his protege, the knight gave him a friendly sign.
Wait for me, he seemed to say to her. From that moment he was no longer at his
game. His features regained their composure, his gaze dimmed.

As soon as he was able to leave the table aside, he got up and came to join
Pascal.

--Well! he asked her, not without a certain anxiety, which
read well in his eyes.

"You see me delighted," replied the young man, enchanted, under the spell.
In my life I have never seen such a charming young girl.

--Is not it? said with a satisfaction no less visible than his
worries the Chevalier de Jeuflas. Well, I would have bet it. Do you want to
that I introduce you to his father, who is, I told you, my friend?

"I would like to, but I think those ladies are gone.

The knight took out his watch.

--Three o'clock soon. It's too late indeed, these ladies are stepping down
always at two o'clock. Madame Gerbeau is inflexible, except for
you, however. Ah! he must like you.

--How! this muzzle...

--If you knew this mother, you would know what an immense favour.
But tell me, are you free tomorrow morning?

--Why that?

"I'll have you lunch with M. Gerbeau."

"I am free as the air," answered Pascal eagerly.

--Well! tomorrow, or rather today, at eleven o'clock sharp,
take a walk in the passage Jouffroy, I will meet you by chance.

--I'll be there, count on me.

At eleven three minutes, Pascal was on his second lap in the
Passage Jouffroy, when he saw the Chevalier de Jeuflas coming from afar,
giving arm to a man of about sixty, in the face
prosperous, with a benevolent countenance. It was M. Gerbeau.

The knight seemed delighted to meet his young friend; he told him
that he had gone that very morning to poach his old friend Gerbeau; in short, he
ends up inviting him to have lunch with them. What Pascal accepted
with apparent pleasure.

On the way, although we did not have far to go, M. de Jeuflas found the
means of recounting Pascal's biography to M. Gerbeau's ear.
So much so that on arriving at the door of the restaurant, the former manufacturer
knew he was going to have lunch with a charming, remarkable young man
as much by his conduct as by his talent, a former student of the School
polytechnic, belonging to an honorable and wealthy family, and ornate
of a personal fortune of four hundred thousand francs.

The knight said all this between two puffs of his cigar, for he
smoked in the morning.

At least his address was not lost. The dessert was not served,
that Pascal had already seduced Antoinette's father. At the cafe, the conquest
was completed.

M. Gerbeau, a very skilful manufacturer, was a very mediocre connoisseur of
houses. Now, for eighteen months he had been at the head of a fairly
bad business. Suddenly seized with the passion to build, a passion that
troubled the brains of so many poor rentiers, he had had the
unfortunate idea of selling properties he had in Saintonge, to
buy land in Paris. On these lands, acquired second-hand,
and very expensive, he had had the no less unfortunate idea of building.

A house under construction, for the uninitiated, is a
real ink bottle: impossible to see the expenses.
That's where Mr. Gerbeau was. He instinctively understood that we
was looting, but who? but how? He was seriously worried, because
that he vaguely knew that it is with speculation as with
the cog of a machine: let a finger engage under the wheel,
we must soon cut off the arm, if we don't want the body to follow the
finger. In speculation, one banknote attracts another, a
fortune is quickly coming to an end.

M. Gerbeau related his misadventure to Pascal, and Pascal promised to
get out of there, making room for fire, if absolutely necessary, but
making it as small as possible.

He kept his word, and after eight days of errands, procedures, calculations
of the young engineer, the manufacturer could see clearly in his business. This
little experiment cost him sixty thousand francs net. He foresees no
without shuddering the depth of the abyss into which he had almost been thrown.
He understood that without Pascal he was perhaps ruined: his recognition
was big.

All these steps, we understand, these arrangements to be made,
often took Pascal to M. Gerbeau during the days that followed.
followed their first meeting. He was invited to dine there several times.
occasions. Thus, he had frequent opportunities to see Mademoiselle
Antoinette, and far from going back on his first impression, he only
to suffer more from the spell. He found in this family a perfume
honesty, happiness, ease, which reminded him of the sweet memory
from his family. In Madame Gerbeau, that mother so dignified without stiffness, so
tender without weakness, he thought he was seeing his mother again. Finally, he felt it,
he understood it, he loved Antoinette.

It was then that Pascal would have liked to see the matrimonial ambassador
go down to the tomb with all its secrets, titles, deeds and registers
written in hieroglyphic characters. The shadow of unctuous and paternal
M. de Saint-Roch pursued him more terrible and more disguised than that
of Jezebel. He dared not curse him, because after all it was to him that he owed
to know the one he loved, but as he would have annihilated her for good
heart!

Then he remembered his signature at the bottom of a treaty, in very
legible. He had it before his eyes, this treatise, written in the characters of
fire; it seemed to him that he had signed a diabolical pact.

And that terrible Chevalier de Jeuflas, another demon, another remorse!
This one perhaps seemed scarier to Pascal, because the negotiator
rarely leaves his laboratory, and this knight, he was to meet him at
every step was a friend of the family in which he wanted
walk in. Wouldn't he attend the wedding? So probably a smile
satanic would come to wander on his lips!

Oh! as Pascal would gladly have given half of what he had
to get to know Antoinette without ever having known the two accomplices of the
pact.

And no one to tell his troubles to, not a friend to consult! For nothing
in the world Pascal would have wanted only his best friend, that Lorilleux knew what
that was happening. He trembled at the mere idea that one day, perhaps,
someone would come to know that he had married through Mr.
of Saint-Roch.

However, something had to be decided. Pascal confessed to Mr.
Gerbeau that he loved his daughter. The manufacturer was delighted with this admission;
only he asked for a few days to consult his wife and daughter.

The response was favourable: three days after his request, Pascal was
admitted to court--officially.

But to whom did he owe this decision so prompt, which fulfilled his wishes
the most expensive?

To the Chevalier de Jeuflas, who had avoided wasting time running to
information, and had answered on his head from his young friend; to
Chevalier de Jeuflas who, for a whole afternoon, locked up with
Madame Gerbeau, had sung the praises of her protege: he was
descended to the smallest of these details, so precious for a worried mother
of his daughter's happiness; he had told day by day the life of the young
engineer; finally to the Chevalier de Jeuflas, who had spoken of the family
of Pascal as if he had known her for twenty years, and had drawn
M. and Madame Divorne the most flattering and most
resembling.

The chevalier had certainly said nothing but the very true. But owe his
happiness to such a man! to be his accomplice!--for after all he was lying in
reality, since he was advancing things of which he was not sure,
facts of which he was ignorant--what torture and what shame!

Pascal wasn't sure whether he was furious or overwhelmed.
joy.




VII


For a fortnight, Pascal, who used to be so homely, no longer lived with
him. His friends came and did not find him.

The servant had the same answer on his lips every day:

--Monsieur went out, he said he wouldn't come back from the party.

Jean Lantier was looking in vain for his partner for a business that
suffered, he said, no delay: no associate.

Lorilleux lost himself in conjectures and was dying of anxiety.

It couldn't last, and one evening the same preoccupation unites
the entrepreneur and the doctor. Both, at ten o'clock in the evening,
were waiting for Pascal in his study.

Jean Lantier, pressed by his wife, wanted to talk about one of his daughters.

Lorilleux had decided to invite his friend to come and have dinner with the family, the
two days later, counting on introducing him to his sister.

At eleven o'clock Pascal returned radiant. He had spent the evening near
Mademoiselle Antoinette, she had not answered: No, to a question
that he had dared to whisper to her.

Pascal returned home with the firm resolution to write to his family.
to seek the necessary permission, and to announce loudly his
marriage. It was the best way to avert suspicion, if
anyone could have it. Thus he left M. de Saint-Roch and the
Chevalier de Jeuflas behind the scenes from which they were not to leave.
M. Gerbeau's constructions perfectly explained the introduction
of Pascal in this family: business relations are often the
prelude to a good and sincere friendship.

--It's not unfortunate! exclaimed Lorilleux, as soon as the young engineer
appeared, we have been expecting you for two hours. Seeing you becomes
furiously difficult. But you are awesome! in which sovereign prince
have you had dinner I didn't know you were so beautiful.

Since his first interview with Mademoiselle Gerbeau, Pascal indeed
turned to the dandy.

"You must correct the fig leaf a little," he replied.
cheerfully; when we want to make conquests, we must as much as possible
put on the conqueror's armor. So, are you happy with my armor?

--Conquests! conqueror," stammered Lorilleux.

--Certainly. Won't you get mad that I adopted the ideas
whose ears have you been telling me for an infinite time? But, by the way,
it's been two weeks since I've barely seen you, have you finally discovered
your ideal girl?

The doctor had a presentiment of a horrible misfortune.

"No, not yet," he answered; finding a woman I want is not
not easy.

"I really believe," said Jean Lantier, "to get my hands on the eel in the
bag of vipers.

"You are also too exacting," resumed Pascal. And, my faith! as I do
not pursue a chimera, I found. I hope I have taken
the eel, as Jean Lantier says. In short, my friends, you who are my
best friends, you will know the big news first: I
Mary, it's decided.

It was like a crushing blow for the two friends of the young engineer.

Lantier sank heavily into an armchair. Lorilleux remained
petrified, more motionless than Lot's wife after the metamorphosis, more
pale as his white doctor's tie. Pascal looked at them with
stupefaction.

--Hey! but, he said, the news of my marriage does not seem to cause you
mad joy. I thought you would share my happiness, I
expected congratulations...

"So it's not a joke?" asked Lantier.

--A joke! I do hope that before three weeks we
we will celebrate the wedding, and I count on you being there, Lantier, my old
friend. And we'll take care of building me a pretty little house, where
we will be hanging the housewarming party before next winter.

"I will do whatever you please," said the contractor with a sigh.
I came, he added, to talk to you about a business I have,
that is to say, what I had in view; but as there is no rush, it will be for
again. It's getting late today, and the moment doesn't seem to me
not well chosen.

In greeting Lorilleux who did not see him, he shook hands with Pascal
and went out. You could hear his heavy footsteps on the stairs that, two
hours before, he had come up brisk and cheerful.

At the same time as Lantier was leaving, Pascal went into another room,
leaving Lorilleux alone in his study.

Only then did the doctor emerge from his immobility. But it was for himself
indulge in one of those fits of cold rage that only people know
of this temper.

Bile, not blood, rushed to his head,
constricted his throat until he was suffocated, and blinded him. With a word, Pascal came
to overthrow the laborious edifice of his life, he was buried under the
rubble.

All is lost, no more hope! These are the words that buzzed to her
ear, and his fury increased. He felt capable of the greatest
crimes. How he hated this man whom only yesterday he called his friend!
And in a few minutes his hatred had taken on appalling proportions.

"The infamous," he said in a muffled voice, his teeth clenched, the
wretch, thus betraying our friendship. Oh! he will pay me dearly
horrible sufferings he gives me. The happiness of his life will not be enough
not to pay me such moments.

And he walked hither and thither, in the study, with the feverish agitation
of a madman, the haggard eye, more frightening than the tiger which circles around
from his lodge. His clenched fingers bumped against the walls. With which
happiness he would have stabbed Pascal! But he was looking, he wanted a
more refined revenge.

But it was already more than the doctor could bear. This access
furious lasted only a minute; he was forced to sit down. His anger
had not diminished, he was a man to maintain it for years,
but little by little he regained his composure.

His contracted face resumed its usual mask. He was thinking,
while mechanically crumpling a few papers placed in front of him on
a table.

Suddenly a name at the bottom of a letter jumped out at him, a name that
revealed to him the enigma of Pascal's conduct.
Saint-Roch," he said to himself; and he read this note written by the ambassador
matrimonial to announce to his client the arrival of one of his friends.

The date of this letter, which fitted so well with the disappearance of
Pascal, was worth for Lorilleux the longest and most complete
explanations.

"No more doubt," he thought, "it's this Mademoiselle Gerbeau he's
wife! If I still need insurance to prove to myself that I don't
Don't be mistaken, Pascal himself will give it to me presently. To marry
through a M. de Saint-Roch! it's horrible. But all
Isn't lost yet, he muttered after a moment of thought. I
then parry this terrible and unforeseen blow.

And obeying a sudden inspiration, which lit up with a ray of joy
his pale face, he took a quill and prepared to write.

At this moment Pascal's voice resounded in the next room.

--Well! doctor, aren't you coming to warm up? It's freezing cold
wolf in my study, we will be much better here to talk.
Bring the cigar box.

"I am yours," cried the doctor; let me finish a letter...

Lorilleux indeed wrote, not one letter, but two. here is
first:

"Dear Mr Divorne,

"If you want to avoid an irreparable misfortune, come running without losing
one minute. Your son has fallen into the hands of a second-hand dealer in
marriages that you may know by name, M. de Saint-Roch.
This man will bring him into one of those families that run away
all honest people, he's going to make her marry one of these young
girls who cannot find husbands. Pascal is in love and
blind. He hid himself and is hiding from his best friends. Their
representations would be useless, you know
your son's stubbornness. Only you can save from shame and
despair this unfortunate young man.

"A friend of yours."

"_P.S._ Perhaps it will be proper not to show this
letter to Pascal. Come, come quickly."

The second letter, intended for M. Gerbeau, ran thus:

"Dear friend,

"Receive my sincere compliments: you are a good father and a fellow
without prejudice. You marry your daughter to a man who was introduced to you
by M. de Saint-Roch, the skilful matrimonial agent. Antoinette will be
very happy! You must be proud to have a man as a son-in-law
enriched by shady speculations,--if he be rich,
which I doubt. You will be even more glorious when you know
why Mr. Pascal Divorne was shamefully expelled from the School
bridges and roadways. Talk to him to find out. Let's go,
good man, prepare the crowns of the dowry.

"As you might not believe me, I'm sending you coins
supporting documents, an autograph of the illustrious Saint-Roch.

"Your best friend is congratulating you. When is the wedding?"

In this second missive, Lorilleux carefully enclosed the note
of M. de Saint-Roch. Then he folded up the two anonymous letters, put
the address at the first, and joined Pascal to find out from him where he
had to address the second. The doctor was quite happy, like a
man who has just seen shattered, two paces from him, a
tile that seemed bound to fall on his head.

--Well! he asked Pascal, now that we are alone,
are you at least going to tell me the story of your love, you dreadful secretive?

The young engineer asked for nothing better. What a great opportunity
to talk about Antoinette! He made no mistake about it, and was prolific as
a lover. But he was careful to omit the names of the ambassador
and the knight his friend. He says that one of his
acquaintances had sent him the former manufacturer who needed
an architect; he had had the good fortune to save the fortune of this brave
man, and their intimacy dated from this service. He had seen the young
daughter, he had asked for it, it had been granted to him, that was all.

"Have you forgotten," said the doctor, "the name of this estimable manufacturer?"

--His name is Gerbeau.

"I was not mistaken," thought Lorilleux. And where dwells, he added
aloud, the happy father of this charming girl?

"Rue Pavée, at number 5," answered Pascal without distrust.

--What! you're getting married in the Marais! Oh! fi, the bourgeois!

--My dear, the Marais is, after the Faubourg Saint-Germain, the district
heiresses; make no mistake about it. It is also one of the rare corners of
Paris, where there are still habitable houses, with real
apartments, and stairs where you can pass two abreast.

"Come, you are a happy mortal," said the doctor. But, stunned as I
am, I forgot something in the epistle that I have just
doodle.

And passing into Pascal's study, he wrote, disguising his
writing, as he had already disguised it, on the address of the second
anonymous letter:

_To Sir
Monsieur_ GERBEAU, _former trader,
5, rue Pavée, in the Marais._
PARIS.

--Goodbye, he said to Pascal when he had finished, I'll leave you alone.
with the memory of the beautiful Antoinette. I will put my letter
post and go home. I will try to dream that I have found a
Antoinette, me too.

Admittedly, Lorilleux had no remorse for the infamous betrayal of which he
made him guilty. In his eyes, Pascal's conduct, the damage he
was talking to him, would have excused many other perfidies. But the blow that
had struck him was too recent for him not to have kept a few
tracks. Although he was in control of himself, his face, so pale
usually seemed livid. His efforts to restrain himself
beading droplets of sweat along his temples. His hand
was still shaking as he shook his friend's loyal hand.

"You have something extraordinary this evening," said Pascal,
staring. Did you experience any strong annoyance? would you be
sick?

"I have nothing, in truth," replied Lorilleux without blushing, "I never
got better.

Then he quickly left. He felt the need to be alone. The two
letters he had in his pocket burned him. Arrived in front of the office
post, he reflects:

"If I put M. Gerbeau's letter in the post this evening," he said to himself, "it will
will most likely close its door to Pascal; but most likely
also Pascal will find the means to have an explanation, and it is
possible that a reconciliation will ensue. If, on the contrary, I let
Mr. Divorne the time to arrive, the anger of the two fathers will scramble if
well the cards that the marriage will be broken forever. It takes Mr.
Divorced four days to receive the letter and come running, so it's
in only four days I will launch my firebrand at M. Gerbeau.

And Lorilleux went to bed, happy as Titus when he had not
wasted his day.




VIII


It was eight o'clock in the morning. Pascal, up since dawn, that is to say
for a quarter of an hour, had been walking around his house, a tape measure in his hand.

"Decidedly," he said, while taking measurements, "impossible to
stay here, it's too small. When I would restore the partitions that
divided my apartment into seven rooms, I would not enlarge it by one
inch, although my landlord believes precisely the opposite. He
will have to look elsewhere. It's unfortunate, I will regret more than once
the greenery of the square; as compensation, it is true, I will no longer have
the view from the top of this Théâtre-Lyrique, which looks like
to mistake, to a large trunk which has lost its handle...

The entrance of M. Divorne senior abruptly interrupted the monologue of
Pascal.

--My father! he cried, dropping, in surprise, the meter he
held.

"Yes, me," answered the attorney. But above all, one word, only one: you
are you getting married is it true?

--I wrote to you.

"And through an heiress dealer?"

Pascal had been careful not to breathe a word of M. de Saint-Roch into his
letter; so he was much surprised, and even more annoyed, to see
confessed so well to the fact. He did not, however, have the idea of denying, knowing
though he could safely confide in his father.

"It is true," he said.

--Unfortunate!

--At least listen to how things happened. It's a
joke which happens to have a serious denouement, I will owe him my
happiness.

The young man's account was long, because he did not omit the circumstance
the most insignificant: M. Divorne listened to her with that patient attention
which he lends to his clients when they inform him of a lawsuit.
When at last Pascal had finished:

--Poor young man! exclaimed M. Divorne, "and you don't see the trap,
and you don't understand that you are the dupe of a comedy prepared for your
intention!

"However, my father, it seems to me that chance alone...

"And you give in to these chances, do you?" But understand well that these
people like that don't sew their tricks together with white thread; if they weren't
clever, they wouldn't take anyone. I admit, however, that their
trap is quite ingenious; someone smarter than you would be caught there. But
one does not remake an old devious attorney at the same time. And here I am,
morbleu!

The solicitor had just awakened in the depths of his son's heart the brood
viper of suspicion. Yet Pascal still wanted to defend the family
Gerbeau. His father interrupted him.

"Come now," continued he, "what do you know of these people?" who do you care about
speak? which people answered you about them? all you know about it,
you got it from two schemers, ganged up to push you into the trap,
that is to say, to bring you into a tarnished and ruined family.

--Oh! ruined.

"You yourself told me that without you the fortune of this M. Gerbeau was
compromised or was about to be in a case. Are you sure he doesn't have
not many such cases?

--If it were only the money, I'm rich enough for two.

-- Either, I admit that he is rich, very rich, does that prove that he
be an honest man? I know, by God! number of rascals
millionaires. But just the way they act, I think I can
predict with certainty that we must give up this marriage.

Pascal did not answer. From his father's speeches, it seemed to him that
scales fell from his eyes. Had he not acted very lightly?

"Listen, waiter," resumed the lawyer, "let's reason a little." When a father of
honorable family wants to marry his daughter, he turns, to find her
a husband, to a gentleman... what do you call him, your schemer?

--From Saint-Roch.

--Go for Saint-Roch. If you had a daughter, would you do it this way?
No. That alone should enlighten you. And then how did you get admitted
in this family? suddenly, without information, without information,
on the so-called word of a confederate. You walk into the house like a
begging in a church, and immediately you are allowed to pay court to
the young lady..... Here, you see, these people...

"However, my father, they are received into honorable families. It is 
at an evening with a former magistrate....

--So you still believe in the former magistrate.... a magistrate where your
knight of industry has his grand entrances! Poor boy! but we have you
dancing at a second-hand ball, with extras hired from the
evening...

--Oh! for example! my father, I know myself in physiognomies, and...

--My dear friend, by putting the price on it, one finds very many intriguing
look honest! But do you want me to agree with you on all these points?
Is. The Gerbeau family is rich and honorable, very honourable, I
do not mind; so it's the girl who...

--Oh! my father! exclaimed Pascal, touched to the heart, please! don't speak
not so. She, so pure, so beautiful! Oh! if you knew her, nothing
What to see that face so suave, those eyes so candid! you
recognize your injustice and error.

M. Divorne shrugged his shoulders.

"What? It's you, at thirty, who speaks thus! But, my boy,
at eighteen, I already knew the faith that must be added to these airs of
candor. You still believe that beautiful eyes, tender and shy, are the
faithful reflection of a beautiful soul! But if a woman wants to cheat on you, her
eyes will tell you nothing of his heart, nor the calm surface
and united with a lake will tell you of the silts and scoria heaped up in the
depths of waters so clear...

--But I love him! exclaimed Pascal, who almost had tears in his eyes,
I love it!

--Alas! my poor friend," said M. Divorne, "I'm afraid it's without
hope. Before deciding anything, however, you have to see, get informed, and
that's what I'm going to do today, after you give me
to eat, however, because I am starving.

While breakfasting, M. Divorne tried to console his son.

"Come now," he said, "don't be sorry, we'll find you another
wife, if you cannot marry that one. Your mother already had one
ready, and even I must tell you that the news of your marriage has
a lot of pain to your mother, a lot; She cried. If you had it
consulted, none of this would happen. You would have come to Lannion, you
had seen the young girl she is destining for you, you would have loved her. But
nothing is lost, if this marriage fails, you will love it....

"I can only love Antoinette," sighed the sad Pascal.

--Really! said the attorney, shaking his head, it's so serious!
Well, we mustn't remain uncertain any longer; this
even tonight you will be fixed. Send me a car, and give me
the address of the young person's father and your two intriguers. Ah!
there, you don't know any of the friends, or the enemies, one is worth the other, of
the Gerbeau family?

--I don't even know what their relationship is.

--Prodigious! I find you prodigious! Ah! it would be good though
important. Come on, think about it, search a little.

--No matter how hard I look, I don't see anyone, except maybe
their notary...

--Their notary? You know the notary of the family and you don't say it!
and you didn't go to him! But, dear friend, when it comes to a
marriage, notaries are the very source of information, we do not
consult only them, they were instituted expressly for that. Her name,
quick...

--Master Bertaud.

--Bertaud....... I don't know him, but it doesn't matter. Its title
enough. He is my friend or must be, all the ministerial officers
are my friends; we are colleagues, or close to it. I start my
turned by him. Come on, I'm leaving, don't worry.

Certainly, if M. Divorne had thought that he would find
information, I do not say excellent, but only passable, it
would not have gone on a quest; he would simply have refused
his consent; he would have taken advantage of the first moment of surprise of
Pascal to extract from him the promise not to ignore it.

But he expected to collect singular stories about these
parents, who put their daughter on display in the shop of a
marriage negotiator; he was about to hear revelations
deplorable, strange confidences; he was looking forward to it
riding in the car; he was happy about it, because when he left Lannion he
had promised his wife to ruin this marriage. He went
thus find themselves broken, without maneuvers on their part, without action
of authority. And not only could Pascal be angry with him, but
still he would be grateful to him for having entered into his ideas and not having
decided the definitive rupture only after steps which proved
how much was needed this end. That's what the attorney thought
going up the staircase of master Bertaud.

Pascal, left alone, was desolate. Was he taken for a dupe or not? The
appearances, it is true, were for the confessed, but appearances are
misleading. How, why the name of Mademoiselle Gerbeau
was it in the repertoire of M. de Saint-Roch's heiresses? He
must have been some hidden motive. Ah! that he bitterly regretted
to have advanced so much, like that, blindly. experience, reason,
told him, proved to him that his father was right. But he
was in love, and his heart pleaded warmly for
of Antoinette.

The noise of a lively discussion in the antechamber pulled Pascal from his
thoughts. Almost immediately the Chevalier de Jeuflas entered, or rather
irruption, violating the severe instruction, given to the servant, not to
let anyone in.

Pascal's first move--it wasn't the right one--was to jump to the
neck of the knight to strangle him. Fortunately, he restrained himself, and all
his anger subsided when he considered the friend and broker of M. de
Saint Roch.

Poor M. de Jeuflas! he looked ten years older. In one night the
grief had carved wrinkles along his temples. Him so straight
the day before, he walked bent over, his head shaky. His toilet had no
usual correction, his tie was crumpled, his shoes stained
mud. The naturally symmetrical arrangement of the few hairs
what remained to him was disturbed.

He, too, must have received a severe blow. It hardly seemed
less distressed than his young friend. He was visibly very moved. His
face expressed dejection; his voice trembled; However, he
was still greasy.

--Well! he said in a pitiful tone, everything has failed. But you know the
misfortune; I see it in your sadness...

And the knight, overwhelmed, sat down, or rather let himself fall on a
armchair.

"Yes," replied Pascal, "my father's arrival...

--It is indeed your father, my faith!..... So you have not received
M. Gerbeau's letter?

"I have received letters," said Pascal, "but I have not opened them.
They are all there, on my chimney.

The knight got up with an effort and, taking the correspondence intact
of his young friend, searched for a moment among the letters, the newspapers,
the printed matter arrived in the morning.

"Here is Gerbeau's letter," he said at last; I recognize his handwriting.
You allow, don't you?

And, without waiting for Pascal's answer, he broke the envelope and
quickly scanned the letter.

--Oh! it's all over, he said when he had finished. I know my
Gerbeau by heart: he would rather perish than admit that he was wrong.
Here, he added, passing the letter to the young man, read... and some
mostly quiet.

Calm was indeed very necessary. M. Gerbeau had written under
the impression of a violent anger, and he had not spared his terms.
He said to Pascal:

"Don't bother, sir, to come to my house. You there
find no one now. I know everything. I learned of your treacherous
maneuvers to surprise my confidence. I know the hateful
accomplices who granted you access to my house. I don't ignore
further your expulsion from the School. My biggest regret is
to be your obliged. Set the price of your services yourself,
ask me for half my fortune, but think no more of my daughter."

Pascal read this insulting letter extremely slowly. There
didn't understand much, it's true, but the meaning tormented him
little. He was more worried about the motive which had prompted M. Gerbeau to act.

--Would it be a comedy? he said to himself; but why? No doubt for
to anticipate a rupture, to forestall my father's investigation. But
how did we know about my father's arrival?

To all these questions he found no satisfactory solution.
Finally, he quietly put the letter back on the table, and M. de
Jeuflas, who was watching him and expecting an explosion of fury, was
very surprised by this calm.

--Well! asked the chevalier, what do you say to that?

--Nothing. M. Gerbeau has no doubt gone mad. He writes insults to me, and
I want to be hanged if I know why.

--What, you don't understand?

--Sorry! I can see very well that he no longer wants to give me his daughter, but
that's all I see. It was not worth doing it to me
proposed by M. de Saint-Roch.

"But, wretch! if he rejects you, it's because he knew the part that
Saint-Roch was involved in this affair.

--Pardieu! it is too strong, answered Pascal; do you hope to make me
to hear that it was without M. Gerbeau's knowledge that his daughter's name
finds on your friend's registers,--with supporting titles, for
talk like him!

"I swear to you that he did not know it.

"Then I am no longer there at all."

--It is, however, quite simple. In the marriages made by Saint Roch, he
almost always happens that one of the two parties is unaware of his intervention.
Do you imagine then that he knows all the people he marries? Not the
less of the world. It has agents, cooperators, who work for
him, who give him the information and who...

--... Share the fees; perfectly! So you, knight, you
you are one of these co-operators, I find the word very pretty.

M. de Jeuflas, under the sardonic gaze of Pascal, could not help
to blush. For a moment he was silent, embarrassed. Finally, taking everything
stroke of courage:

--Well! yes, he replied, I am one of Saint-Roch's agents. He
you have to live, don't you, and _I see worse trades_. _Shame, if
shame there is_, I share it with more than one well-posed man and
lavishly decorated, with a number of highly esteemed old women, very
honored and very devout. Ah! I know more than one agent in Saint-Roch
which one hardly suspects, and of which no one would have the idea to
challenge... But after all, what's the harm in acting honestly?

--Oh! loyally! said Pascal...

--Yes sir. Thus, I can very well explain to you the mechanism of
Saint Roch. He has agents, me, for example. I list the
all the bridesmaids I know among my relations, including
parents are my friends. I take information about the fortune,
on morality, etc. I do the same for young people, and I carry
all in Saint-Roch. His other cooperators do the same. He
copies our lists, and can then offer the young people or the
young ladies who are pointed out to him, and that without their knowledge. That's what is
arrived for Mademoiselle Gerbeau. Sometimes even marriages
conclude without having addressed Saint-Roch directly, and this is
in this consists his skill; everything is done by his agents, whether he
relates.

Pascal still kept his sad air; deep down, he was delighted.
Willingly he would have kissed the matrimonial cooperator, for he does not
did not doubt its veracity: one does not imitate the air and the tone that
the afflicted knight. The young man was reborn in hope.--"Thus
so, he said to himself, Antoinette is not lost to me.

"Now," he asked the chevalier, "how was M. Gerbeau
informed?...

--I should have told you first, it's an anonymous letter...

--Oh!

--Yes, an anonymous letter, and which, moreover, must be from one of your friends.

"Know, sir," said Pascal, "that my friends don't make such
infamy.

--It's at least from someone who has access to your home, because literally
was enclosed the note by which Saint-Roch announced my visit to you.

--It's impossible! cried the young man.

And he ran to his office to find the famous note. But it's
in vain he searched, searched all the drawers, upset his boxes,
shook out all the papers one by one; the note could not be found. He came
to sit down very discouraged.

"It's incredible," he said, "an anonymous letter! But by the way, who has
tell my father?

--Ah! answered the knight, you have some very perfidious enemy.

--Oh! I will find it. If I only had five minutes on my hands
the letter addressed to M. Gerbeau...

"Go and ask him if you like," said M. de Jeuflas, with
discouragement; as for me, I do not feel the courage to do so. He had me
treated this morning in an undignified way, he almost threw me out of the door...

--So how the hell does a man like you put himself in the pay of a
marriage broker?

--Hey! sir! misery! I was rich, I am ruined. Is it to my
age you start working? And again, what good would I be...

--Poor knight! true, I pity you...

"You would be wrong to mock me, in any case. This case with
Gerbeau loses me forever. What will happen if it leaks out? This is
is made of my honor, of my credit, of my consideration, all the
houses will be closed to me.

Pascal took pity on this unfortunate man.

"Whatever happens," he said to her, "I promise you the most
absolute.

"And Gerbeau, will he be silent?" This morning he kicked me out of his house, oh
shame! I the Chevalier de Jeuflas. At this hour, he has no doubt
told the adventure to twenty people.

"I may be mistaken," resumed Pascal, "but it seems to me that in
the very interest of his daughter, M. Gerbeau must be silent. You are alarmed
wrongly.

But no matter how hard Pascal tried, he couldn't bring a smile back to his lips.
of the unfortunate cooperator. He had death in his soul, he was no more
only the shadow of himself.

When at last he withdrew, he affectionately shook hands with the young
man, and his last word was advice.

"You have a very dangerous enemy," he said. "Be on your guard.

This advice was at least useless.

Struck to the heart in his love, Pascal was determined to discover
the wretch who thus betrayed friendship. M. Gerbeau could not
wanting to reconsider his decision, then it was over with the happiness of his
life. He wanted revenge.




IX


Sitting at his desk, in front of the famous green boxes that contain so many
and such terrible secrets, in front of its registers in characters
hieroglyphics, M. de Saint-Roch, his eye illuminated by inspiration,
worked for the happiness of mankind.

The apostle of marriage was writing an advertisement, one of those superb advertisements
which, placed on the fourth page, sometimes make _Ami de la
Religion_ an amusing journal.

The task was painful and the work bristling with difficulties. We
saw the paper covered with erasures and overwriting. It's that
the announcement is the serious side of the mission of the illustrious ambassador:
each line costs him big, and ad dealers have a small
instrument for measuring space; also it is necessary to say a lot in a few
words.

This is what the propagator-initiator was trying to do. His claim,
destined to make all single hearts beat faster,
was addressed more especially than usual to fathers of families:

"Prudent fathers," he said, "I am the safeguard of the honor of
families. It was I, Saint-Roch,--no branches,--who invented the
marriage forty years ago. My laboratory is the antechamber of the
town hall, my benevolence is almost worth the sacrament. Your ladies you
embarrass them, refer them to me, I will find them a placement
advantageous. Write to me--legibly,--I have just received a
complete assortment of sovereign princes to be married, from the most beautiful
quality. Fathers of families, you will bless me, Saint-Roch, because..."

Six strokes struck on a gong made the ambassador start.

--Oh! he said, a customer in the pearl-gray salon.

He immediately hid his prospectus in a drawer, and opening a cupboard,
he took out of it a cornflower blue coat, exactly like the one he
had on him, with the only difference that the first was strong
grated, and the second brand new.

This change of sight, so important for a matrimonial negotiation,
finished, he approached the mirror to give a look at his
toilet.

He pulled off his sleeve cuffs, straightened his crop, arranged
gracefully the cataracts of his watch chains, rubbed the
jewels of her rings to give them more brilliance, and finally, of a
coquettish gesture of the head, gave her blonde curly hair a twist
more graceful.

Then he addressed a last and charming smile to himself in the mirror and
headed for the pearl-gray living room, where presumably "the practice"
grew impatient.

He came in. Following his noble and affable habit, he graciously bowed
the new client, in three stages, as prescribed by the
good school keeping teachers, heels on the same line,
the tip of the foot outside, the bust slightly inclined, the elbow
rounded, hand at chest height...

He was executing the second step of his salute, he was already preparing the
third, when the customer jumped at his throat, without pity for the
jabot, calling him: Miserable!

Poor M. de Saint-Roch had a terrible fright. He took a leap of
side, trying to put the table between him and this little visitor
parliamentary.

This rapid movement of retreat succeeded him; but, in its evolution,
it hit the table and dragged seven to eight porcelain ex-votos, which
fell and broke with a bang.

"Well," thought the ambassador, "it must be some newlywed who
is not happy. I know that.

It was not a newlywed, but M. Gerbeau in person. The
Lorilleux's anonymous letter produced its little effect. It was no longer
the honest and worthy merchant we know was a wild tiger.
Knowing the name of his daughter on the registers of M. de Saint-Roch had
thrown off its hinges. He had promised himself to strike the cane at
the ambassador, and he had come for the sole purpose of keeping his promise.

However, the inventor of marriage, entrenched behind his table, had
regained some courage.

"I warn you," he said to his adversary, "if you still use
violence, I call my servants. Now, if you want to talk,
let's talk, but gently. Who are you and what...

"Who am I, rascal," replied the ex-maker, "a father whose
almost compromised the girl, infamous fiddler! I am mister
Gerbeau, to whom you wanted to give as son-in-law a crazy, vile man
flea market! a certain Pascal Divorne, shamefully expelled from the School.

"Be quiet," cried M. de Saint-Roch, "and don't insult a young man.
who is better in his little finger than you in your whole person.

--Ah! you insult me, rascal! resumed M. Gerbeau. Wait, wait!

And he circled around the table trying to seize the negotiator.
But M. de Saint-Roch was no less nimble than he; the discussion
however continued.

"Who allowed you to interfere in my daughter's marriage?"

--I am not accountable.

--I will address myself to the courts.

--I care little, I have judgments which sanction my honorable
occupation.

Weary, out of breath, unable to bear it any longer, the two adversaries
stopped. But what a mess, righteous gods! in the toilet so well
ordered by M. de Saint-Roch! The golden chains randomly beat her
chest, the jabot hung like a rag, one of the cuffs was
half torn off; and the beautiful blond hair that had moved!

He had not, however, this illustrious ambassador, lost his
shiny; he undertook, by dint of eloquence, to tame the fierce M.
Gerbeau.

"You spoke of tribunals, sir," he exclaimed, "but would I not have
not the right to complain myself of your transports? You have
insulted the noblest of professions, you slandered my priesthood.

--Rogue! repeated M. Gerbeau between his teeth.

--Others also tried to tarnish me in the eyes of my contemporaries
and posterity: I have obtained justice. Do you know the stops
in my favor?

--I do not care.

--Have you read the pleadings of my lawyers?

--I don't care!

--Finally, a printed consultation at my expense?

M. Gerbeau was beginning to feel a little ashamed of his outburst.

"It's not about all that," he said irritably. You dared to mix
my daughter's name to your filthy fiddling, that's what I can't
to suffer. I won't get out of here until I tear with my hand the
page where you wrote my daughter's name. I defend you now
to take care of her. I need your promise and guarantees.

"Very well," replied the ambassador; please, sir, follow me in my
cabinet, we will explain ourselves.

An explanation, begun so briskly, must have been long. She was
endless. And yet, never had the famous negotiator been so
beautiful, so touching, so pathetic. Forgetting the mess of her toilet,
which at another time would have filled him with confusion and paralyzed his
means, he piled reason upon reason, not to exculpate himself, but
to convince his opponent.

Despite the difficulties, he still hoped to renew this broken marriage;
such a beautiful wedding, so marvelously matched! he knew better than
nobody.

He first attacked the prejudices of M. Gerbeau. To ensure the
susceptibilities of this merchant, the ambassador was not afraid to
tear in his eyes the mysterious veil which for the profane surrounds
its operations. He laid bare the ingenious workings of his house. He boasted
then the greatness of his mission, the benefits of his intermediary.
Isn't this profession a happy progress of our
civilization, just like steam, gas, ready-made clothes,
the omnibuses and the electric telegraph?

But he really reached the sublime, when he spoke of Pascal,
when he enumerated the fine qualities of this young engineer, so rich,
so thrifty, true white blackbird of sons-in-law. Even, carried away by his
subject, he sometimes violated his vow of secrecy, and, for
exculpate Pascal, cowardly calumniated and accused of having been fired from
School, he told the story of what had made him give up his
patent.

The ambassador was preaching in the desert. M. Gerbeau remained colder than
marble; he confined himself to raising his voice from time to time, to remind
the purpose of his visit. Finally, seeing that the eloquence of M. de Saint-Roch
did not stop:

--Let's break on that, he said, I don't believe a word of all that you
tell me; I'm wrong, I believe you have a great interest in marrying
Mr Divorne.

--Hey! sir, notaries also have an interest in marrying off their clients...

--Yes, but they are ministerial officers; we know we can trust
their; their honesty and discretion...

The ambassador saw the day to strike, he believed, a decisive blow.

--Their discretion! he exclaimed, ah! I see very well, sir, that you
don't know mine; I have, however, spent more than a hundred thousand
frank to announce it to the whole world. A secret is with me more
security than your money at the Banque de France. My house is the
confessional of the universe, the tomb of the secrets of the whole world. Nothing 
will never transpire from the mysteries of which I am the confidant. The death
even won't make me reveal anything. When I die, everything must follow me
coffin, everything, cabinet, titles, memoirs. I have never trained a student.
As for my records, you can open them. Take a look at this
nomenclature of all the heiresses of the five parts of the world, you
understand nothing of the hieroglyphic characters that only I can
decipher...

The sound of a bell, which resounded in the distance of the apartments,
abruptly interrupted the negotiator. He listened and counted
five strokes.

--Plague be importunate! he whispered, it's a visit, to the living room
sky blue.

Almost immediately a servant half opened one of the closet doors and
made a sign to M. de Saint-Roch.

--A thousand pardons! said the ambassador to M. Gerbeau, I am yours to
the moment. And he approached the servant.

--Sir, said the latter in a low voice, there is a gentleman in the living room
blue.

--I know it, I heard, it was useless to disturb me.

"It's because Monsieur doesn't know that this gentleman seems furious." He ... not
didn't want to wait and threatened to break everything.

--Devil! what kind of man is he?

--A tall one who has golden spectacles; rather old, well dressed, the air of
province, he gave me his card.

M. de Saint-Roch took the card, looked at it, and pushed a
exclamation of joy; he had read:

PIERRE DIVORNE,

_License attorney_.

--The father! he thought, the lawyer! it is heaven that sends it to me.

And seized by one of those sublime inspirations which decide battles,
he pushed the servant aside, and rushed into the corridor, leaving his
alone and amazed visitor.

M. Divorne, the father, had just come from Maître Bertaud. the
notary had given him such details about Antoinette's family.
unexpected, such brilliant information, that he bitterly regretted the
promise made to his wife to break off the marriage. But, slave of his
his word, he firmed up his resolve to refuse despite all his
consent. If he came to the negotiator, it was because he wanted
vent his anger a little, and wash his head properly.

That is to say that he gave a very bad reception to M. de Saint-Roch, who was running up to him.
But the ambassador was not amused to answer, he took the arm of
the attorney, and pushing him almost before him:

"In my study," he said, "in my study.

Once entered:

"Monsieur," he said, addressing his first visitor, "I have
the honor to present to you Mr. Pierre Divorne, lawyer licensed near the
Court of Lannion, father of M. Pascal.

Then, turning to the lawyer:

"I present to you, sir," he said, "M. Gerbeau, a former manufacturer at
Roubaix, father of Mademoiselle Antoinette.

The two fathers greeted each other coldly, while M. de Saint-Roch
was going to sit behind his desk, as a man now perfectly
disinterested in the matter.

There was a fairly long moment of silence between the solicitor and the manufacturer.
Then they began to talk together, very eagerly, each hoping
silence the other and force him to listen.

Mr. Gerbeau, who had had no information and who persisted in
to believe taken for dupe, was most irritated. He talked a lot
upper; he kept repeating the same sentence over and over again:

--I don't want to hear anything, I positively refuse your son...

This insulting obstinacy in refusing Pascal exasperated M. Divorne,
end.

"Let's go to Maître Bertaud and explain to us," he suggested.

"So be it," said M. Gerbeau.

And they went out,--by the passage of introduction, at the risk of
meet someone!--without even greeting M. de Saint-Roch.

But this impoliteness did not sadden the negotiator.

"They're going to the notary's," he said to himself, joyfully rubbing his
hands is a good sign. It gave me trouble, but the matter is in the
bag: here ten thousand francs at least, including three thousand for Jeuflas;
net profit, seven thousand pounds.

And sitting down at his desk, he went back to making his advertisement,
which ended like this:

"What especially distinguishes M. de Saint-Roch is that never
self-interest does not guide him. To moralize the human species, that is his goal;
to make the marriage work, that is his way. Mystery and
disinterestedness are his motto."

The illustrious negotiator had guessed correctly. Everything worked out in the study
of the notary. Master Bertaud knew how to put into practice these beautiful and
noble words of a tabellion to his successor: "Remember, young
man, that a notary is a buffer intended to cushion the shock of
interests." He cleverly interposed himself between these two fathers, between M.
Gerbeau, who did not want to give up his daughter, and M. Divorne, who
persisted in wanting this girl, ever since her son had been refused her.

Thanks to the inexhaustible patience of Master Bertaud, the most patient and
most unctuous of notaries, we end up getting along.

After less than five hours of talks, the marriage was called off,
decided, concluded, almost signed.

It was stipulated, among other conditions, that Mr. Gerbeau would give his
daughter a hundred thousand crowns in cash. It was at least fifty thousand francs
more than the old manufacturer would have wanted, but he had had his hand
forced, both by the notary and by Mr. Divorne.

The lawyer, intractable on the dowry article, was far from suspecting
that he worked much less for his son than for the ambassador
marital.

Finally, the date of the marriage was fixed, and the two fathers, having become the
best friends in the world, came out of master's study together
Bertaud. Mr. Divorne was eager to announce the good news to his son.

The visit of the Chevalier de Jeuflas had singularly reassured Pascal,
but he was far from expecting such a prompt solution.

He nearly fell backwards when he saw his father and M.
Gerbeau. But it's not long to come back from the concussions that give
unexpected happiness.

Pascal was quickly made aware of what had happened, both at the
propagator-initiator than at the notary, and soon he found himself
that he was the least surprised of the three.

--Who ever would have expected that? repeated M. Divorne.

And in fact, the solicitor would have been very embarrassed to explain how,
suddenly he had forgotten the oaths he had sworn to his wife.

"What I shall never understand," said M. Gerbeau, "is that this dear
Pascal had the incredible, impossible idea of addressing this M. de
Saint Roch.

--Oh! for that, answered Pascal, I swear that I simply believed
make a very innocent joke.

"As if we were joking about marriage," said M. Divorne gravely.
it's playing with fire.

"And again," continued Pascal, "who would ever have suspected the role of my
Ambassador, without one of my friends who hastened to write to you? the
unfortunate thought he was harming me, he has done me the greatest service.
But I would like to know who I should thank.

"You should see the handwriting," said M. Gerbeau; here is my letter.

"And mine," said M. Divorne.

But the handwriting, skilfully counterfeited, taught Pascal nothing. He
tossed and turned the two anonymous letters, while digging into his
head to look for the motive of their author, when he saw his
his own initials, a P and a D in relief, at the corners of the two sheets of
paper.

--Morbleu! he said, these letters were written at my house.

--But by whom? asked M. Gerbeau and the solicitor together.

--Ah! there you are, answered Pascal; many friends come to my house.

But at the same time the young man said to himself that, alone, Lorilleux or
Jean Lantier had been able to seize M. de Saint-Roch's note. the
doubt in this regard was not possible.

It was then that Pascal remembered his friend's pallor, the last
times he had seen it. He remembered again that the doctor had stayed
alone, that evening, in his study, to write there, he said, a
letter.

Obviously Lorilleux was the culprit.

This cowardly betrayal of a childhood friend overwhelmed Pascal. The
disappointments in friendship are more cruel than in love, because they are
more unexpected. However, he was careful not to say this name out loud.
which he had just guessed. Indignant against the doctor, he felt that he
still loved him and that he was reluctant to scorn the name of a former
college classmate; he was ashamed to admit that he had been duped
deceptive appearances.

Also, when M. Gerbeau, after a fairly long silence, asked him:

--Well! can you guess? are you on the trail?

"No," he answered. I don't even have a suspicion.

"We must make an inquiry," suggested the solicitor. If you stay in
uncertainty, you are condemned to distrust all your friends.

"I prefer not to think of this infamy any longer," said Pascal resolutely.

And he crumpled up the letters and threw them into a corner, reserving plenty of
take them back later, to confuse and overwhelm the traitor
Lorilleux.

--Is! exclaimed M. Gerbeau, let's not think about it any more, any more
and his acolyte Jeuflas. Universal forgiveness. And me, I'm going, right away,
console my poor daughter, whom I had left in tears, I can
say it now.

Pascal was not sorry to learn that Mademoiselle Antoinette had
cried a lot; and, no doubt to thank his future father-in-law for
confession, he kissed her heartily.




X


Following the example of cautious miners, who quickly move away when,
loaded mine, they set fire to the fuse, Lorilleux had held on
the gap while waiting for the explosion of its anonymous bombs.

He only reappeared the day after that busy day when the wedding of
Pascal had been decided. The doctor hid his serious
worries under a pleasantly bantering air.

--What's new? he asked, settling into his chair.
friend. Me, I'm overwhelmed with work: all my clients have given themselves the
word for getting sick the same day. And your wedding, by the way?

"I am still marrying Mademoiselle Gerbeau."

--Ah! asked the doctor, who turned pale. And your father?

"He's been here since yesterday morning.

--He consents?

--Who would prevent him?

Lorilleux, greatly disconcerted, wondered anxiously if he had
not mistaken in writing the addresses, when Pascal, who had risen
very calmly, handed him the anonymous letters, telling him in a
your strong calm:

"Here, my friend, here are two letters which nearly ruined my
marriage; take them back, and above all take care to burn them. that nobody
do not suspect that you are capable of such an action.

Coming to his friend's house, the doctor was prepared for anything, anything, except
to that. He stammered a few words of apology; he wanted to try
deny, he had not the strength. Shame, emotion suffocated him.

He got up, hiding his face between his hands, and walked towards the
door staggering like a drunken man.

Pascal stopped him.

"I do not forget thus," he said to her, "twenty years of a devoted friendship;
Lorilleux, I forgive you.

--Ah! exclaimed the unfortunate doctor, overwhelmed by tears,
what you're doing there, because you don't know what thoughts were guiding me.

--I do not want to know it.

--It would be generous to hear me; please listen to me. Your marriage,
my friend, is the hardest blow destiny can deal me. This is
is made of the dreams of my life.

--What! because I am marrying Mademoiselle Gerbeau?

--Yes! I wanted to give you a wife. This woman is my sister.
Alone, you seemed to me worthy of her. I thought this would ensure your happiness
and his. I have been wanting this marriage for more than fifteen years...

--Hey! Why didn't you say it earlier. I might already have four
children at this time...

--I wanted to wait.

--My dear friend, I have repeated it to you twenty times, the people who wait
always let the pear be ripe, end up never eating it.

"Overwhelm me," sighed the doctor, "I deserve it, but, in the name of heaven,
don't laugh at me.

"I have never been more serious," resumed Pascal; but see the vanity
plans: you wanted to marry me with your sister, my mother raised
expressly for me an heiress, Lantier destined me one of his daughters...
Follies. I'm getting married, and it's by chance. Do you see, my dear, we
never marry premeditated.

Lorilleux was too overwhelmed to reply.

"Listen," continued Pascal, "do you want, do you want to make once in your life a
sensible action? Accept, but there, suddenly, eyes closed, a
proposal that I am going to make to you, and which will prove to you that I already had you
forgiven.

--I'm ready to do whatever you want.

--Lantier wanted to give me one of his daughters, the eldest, with two hundred
a thousand francs dowry. I declare the young person charming; but
Lantier only warned me this morning, it was too late, I like one
other. Only, to calm the sorrow of this father, I proposed to him
another son-in-law; and that other is you. You suit him, do you accept?
is it said?

--At least, give me a few days to reflect.

--Not an hour. Yes or no, right away.

Uncertain, distraught, almost mad at having to suddenly take a
decision so serious, Lorilleux closed his eyes, like the dazzled traveler
who suddenly, under his feet, sees a gaping abyss. He who
matured his most indifferent actions, thus resolving to act
the most important thing in life, what an ordeal! But finally, triumphing over
habits of his entire existence:

"So be it," he said, "I accept.

And in a low voice, he added: My wife's fortune will reflect on my
sister.

"So," resumed Pascal, "I can warn Lantier."

--Yes, I've always been unhappy, maybe luck
will it come through you.

--Hey! dear friend, for happiness to enter a house, it must
hold the door open.

* * * * *

That same evening, to forestall any occasion for future grief, Pascal,
after much hesitation, dared-against the advice of M. Divorne and even of
M. Gerbeau,--to inform Mademoiselle Antoinette of all that had
past; he tells her the part played by the matrimonial ambassador and the
Chevalier de Jeuflas For all answer, the young girl handed him the
hand, as I wish, dear reader, that the woman you
love, when you have some request to present to him.

However, the Chevalier de Jeuflas was not invited to the wedding, which
take place fifteen days later.




XI


For a month, the young couple had been living in a lovely
house on the Champs-Elysées, arranged, God knows with what care! by
Jean Lantier, who had become the father-in-law of Doctor Lorilleux; Mr. and Mrs.
Divorne had left for Lannion, delighted with their daughter-in-law,
when one morning a gentleman showed up who was basically holding,
he said, talking to Pascal.

This visitor was smartly dressed, despite the early hour. He
wore, over his cornflower blue coat, a colored comforter
light, lined with white satin, he wore straw gloves. Not to
disturb the marvelous order of her blonde hair, he held her
handmade hat.

The servant thought at first that this curly-haired stranger was coming out of
some ball and went to the wrong door; but, as he insisted under
pretext of very urgent business, he decided to introduce it into the
his master's study.

"Good morning, dear child," said the honeyed voice of M. de Saint-Roch; I have
wanted to surprise you in your happiness; do you forgive me for this
indiscretion which is my only reward?

Pascal did not think fit to offer a seat to the ambassador.

"Well, dear client," continued the negotiator, "let us bless our
friend? I didn't cheat on you, huh? papa Gerbeau kindly
executed; plague! three hundred thousand francs....

"I am in a great hurry this morning," interrupted Pascal.

M. de Saint-Roch heaved a deep sigh.

--Ungrateful! he murmured, ungrateful! he forgets that I was his initiator
the bliss of marriage.

--What is it about?

"It is the least of things," resumed the ambassador; we have a small
treated, you know, five percent of the dowry. You had a hundred thousand
crowns, I have fifteen thousand francs back.

--What if I refuse to pay? Pascal asked with a smile.

--Oh! said M. de Saint-Roch, turning pale under his vermilion,
joke, haggle over your happiness...

--But what if I wasn't joking, if I was haggling?

--We would plead, then, I have the pain to tell you, and I
would definitely win. I have, you know, stops in my...

"Enough, enough," said Pascal.
ambassadors, here is your money.

--Ah! dear child, exclaimed the illustrious man in a gently moved voice,
I expected nothing less from your recognition. It is the debt of
happiness that you acquit... Then, noticing on the desk a small
paperweight:--I take this away, he said; this memory will be more to me
precious than the banknotes you have just given me. not
am I not your second father, seeing this pious gift of a...

"Goodbye, dear Monsieur de Saint-Roch," said Pascal, pushing his
second father towards the door.

But the _diou_ of marriage stopped on the threshold.

"Dear child," he said in a low voice, "if ever, God preserve you from this
woe!--you were to lose your wife, remember my good
offices, and preserve your clientele for me.

* * * * *




II

MARRIAGE PROMISES




I


According to everyone, even his friends, and we know the impartiality of friends,
Hector Malestrat was and deserved to be the lion of youth
Bordeaux.

He was, in 1859, a very pretty boy, a little fat, slightly
pretentious, and proud as it should be of its advantages. He had
twenty-nine years old, a pleasing figure, plenty of money, and a good
tailor. His hotel in Bordeaux was cited as a marvel,
admired his horses and carriages, people slavishly copied his
delivered; his chalet in Arcachon had made an Englishman sick with jealousy
spleenic. Finally, the capricious fortune had taken pleasure in emptying on the
head of this happy mortal the safe of his favors.

Hector was the only son of a fabulously wealthy and
nevertheless of such rare honesty, that in Bordeaux his name had become the
synonymous with commercial integrity. At the end of his career, and as he
was seriously thinking of finally enjoying his millions, this merchant was
suffering from misfortunes that no one could foresee. The bankruptcy of several
houses in England and Holland, three losses at sea, a fall
enormous on the wines, put him on the brink of his loss. Anything other than
had succumbed to him, his immense credit allowed him to face everything,
the storm passed without overthrowing it.

But if he was not completely ruined, his capital underwent such a
decrease that he found himself poor, comparing the past to the present. He
took great pain from it, like any man accustomed to happiness, who does not
knows what struggle is and allows himself to be beaten at the first setback.
The death of his wife, his companion of twenty-five years, whom he loved with everything
what trade had left him of heart, complicated sorrows
already over his energy. He lowered his head at this last blow,
languished about a year, and died with the regret of not having been able
repair what he called his disaster, by asking forgiveness from his son
to have put him on the straw by his imprudence.

At twenty-three, Hector therefore found himself an orphan, free and master of a
a fortune which still amounted to nearly a hundred thousand livres a year.
His father, on dying, had recommended him to continue the business;
but, after a few days of reflection, he thought he had no
expensive taste, that consequently it was rather rich. He liquidated at
train operations at all costs, closed the counter and no longer wanted
hear about business. He said he didn't have too much of all his
time to occupy himself seriously with his pleasures.

From that moment he gave flight to all his fancies, and began
to scatter his earnings most happily in the world, in the company of
some _beauties_ from his circle who, from the first days, wanted
well form a small court for him, and later became the satellites
of this star.

Hector, however, as a real son of his calculating age, claimed
bring to its disorder an infinite order. He promised himself and kept
speech, closing the ears when necessary, and even the heart, to
all workouts. He had for his prodigalities the prudence of a
confessed. He agreed for sixty thousand francs of follies a year, and
he never spent ten louis more.

That was enough to secure him a fine position; he had the art of
take first place. A scandalous adventure in the big world
was the first step of its pedestal. He did not lie to if
happy beginnings, and the chronicle assures that he rarely found
cruel. No doubt he had the skill to choose well, and he
did not compromise his reputation as a conqueror, by fighting battles
lost in advance, or even doubtful.

He had a very busy life. Was a dancer arriving at the
Grand-Théâtre with silly pretensions to virtue? we were sure of it
find at the head of the falling cabal this prejudiced sylph and the
forced to leave or surrender. Ordinarily he tyrannized over the
first strong singer, happy to ensure, at this price, the
protection of a man who reigned despotically in the infernal lodge
of the Opera, and whose _veto_ was final at the critical moment of the
beginnings. She was entitled, in exchange for her confidence, to successes
storms paid cash, to avalanches of bouquets and crowns, to
an ovation during his benefit, and to an account opened at the cash desk of
his tyrant, in the article love.

What did Hector need to crown the edifice of his reputation? Of them
or three duels. He had them, happy for him, not too unhappy for
his opponents. Glory without remorse, triumph without hate
of victory. His bravery became a notorious fact, and he was protected
direct mischief. We feared his mind a little
brutal, like that of all advantageous men who, after having
dared, believe they can say anything.

To vary these noble and serious occupations, Hector, following the
season, hunted or ventured out to sea on a yacht of his own. Then he
drew up his carriages and rode his horse. When he passed, many
people stopped at the edge of the sidewalk or at least turned around.
The little grisettes, so irritating under their beehive caps of
ribbons, didn't have big enough eyes to look at him. He could
collect on its way like a murmur of admiration. We were saying:

--Here comes M. Malestrat.

And this is a lively and delicate enjoyment, the greatest of cities
provincial. In Paris, we ignore this pleasure, which transports vanity:
Rastignac and de Marsay pass unnoticed in the crowd rolling on the
boulevards. The majority do not know M. de Rothschild by sight.

Hector might have made people run; the discomfiture of a friend of his who had
spent a million to win a prize of eight hundred francs, came
enlighten him very appropriately on the danger of a stable. It was like a
post of salvation placed near the abyss. His biggest expense was the
game. We play a lot in Bordeaux; whoever walked past midnight
around the Grand-Théâtre, was easily convinced of this. HAS
through the shutters of the clubs, closed by order of the police, filter from
bright lights, and in the silence of the night one hears the tinkling of
gold on carpets. It's like a provocation of fortune, like a
sign above the door: Here we win. Unfortunately, we lose
often too, but Hector was happy at the game.

Also this absolute king was at the same time very envied, very adulated, very
calumny. Some called him miserly, others prodigal. We can not
please everyone. A few men, of those who earned it more
of reason at baccarat, accused him of being a gambler. some soupers
emeritus had gone so far as to speak ill of his cellar and to
discredit his cook. Finally two or three beautiful ladies, after
needlessly compromising themselves for him, had come to shred
his reputation for their thirty-two false teeth. But he had for him
the charming squadron of young ladies to marry,--it was said so
dangerous!--and the sacred phalanx of mothers who watched him for
their little girls--it was assured that he would not care for the dowry;--and also
those who borrowed money from him. All in all, a respectable army.
Friends and enemies, flatterers and slanderers, he had everything
enshrines superiority.

Well! this happy man was bored.

Like many people, Hector was worth more than his reputation. who had it
judged on his way of life, would have been grossly mistaken. He did
number of follies, but without passion, the heart had remained foreign to it.
He acted according to certain formulas which the world imposes, and which
often make a clever man dependent on fools. Become a
fashionable man had flattered him at the start; his goal achieved, he had
thought his honor interested in maintaining his reputation. His vanity was
become like a ball and chain which he dragged along, without daring to break the chain. He
wanted to give a purpose to his existence, but he did not know
which. A false shame, a certain self-distrust, and also the
a thousand threads of habit held him back.

He wondered how to go about doing otherwise than he had
done so far, sought and did not find. What to undertake
age? Getting back to business? But the money is all the interest of the
trade, and he found himself richer than he wanted. It would have been necessary to
put resolutely to work, but to what? and what would Bordeaux say?
Braving sword in hand, he felt himself without courage against public opinion.
Wasn't he himself a man of opinion, and didn't he owe it
everything? He only knew how to blush at his lack of resolution. He despised a
little his good friends, but their taunts inspired him with real
terror. Until then he had lived not for himself, but for others;
he understood it very well, and this idea exasperated him. judging
the future according to the past, he felt dull-hearted, but he did not
decided on nothing.

The fact is that he was fed up with this existence, drier than a
academic praise, and, despite its apparent variety, more monotonous than
the evolutions of a pendulum.

In the evening, on returning home, he let himself go in his armchair,
more tired than an actor after six hours on stage, yawning and
repeated with enormous discouragement:

--It's always the same thing, always the same thing!

Ah! if the friends had seen it! But he carefully concealed this overwhelming
boredom, which no one suspected, not even his valet.

Finally, one morning, he had an inspiration that he judged sent from above.

--If I made an end, he murmured, if I married?

He seizes the inspiration on the fly, and, on the spot, without trouble, without
hesitations, he decided that before three months he would be married; he who
until then had thought of marriage only as a young deputy head of the
Ministry, ambitious and restless, thinks of his retirement.

His mind did not stop for a minute at these thousand futile details or
serious, sad or charming, which make marriage so beautiful or so
awful thing. Neither did he think of the seven raptures which,
says the Arab poet, await the heart of the bridegroom. Even he didn't ask himself
not that terrible problem, ghost of the last night of those who go
to bind forever:--Shall I be happy? will I be unhappy?

No, he was simply saying to himself:--I've had enough of the life of a bachelor, that
will change.

And thus he built his castle in Spain:

--My wife will be pretty, witty, and very rich. We will have the
best house in Bordeaux. She will admirably do the honors of
her living room, we will receive a lot, I will be the most envied and, therefore,
the happiest of men.

After living for the world, he was going to marry for the world.
Always the same madness.

That same evening, before leaving the circle, he told his friends of his
high resolution; he says it was a thing settled irrevocably.

He had scarcely gone out when there was a general _outcry_.--What a fly!
stung him? was he going crazy? To put the noose around his neck, at his age!

If only he had asked his friends for advice! What are friends for?
if we don't consult them? The intimates declared themselves very hurt,
saying that he had handled the whole affair with little delicacy.

But Hector's usual companions, everyday guests, were
seriously affected. They planned that the case of a married man
is more difficult to compose than that of a bachelor. Basically,
they found themselves wronged, and their face took on mourning that soon, without
doubt, was going to take their fork.

The conversation about this text from Hector's marriage was endless. Table
baccarat was neglected, so great was the interest.

As he had won all evening, we can see that spite does not
hadn't made him speak. So they thought only of discovering the woman
mysterious which had triumphed over the irresistible. All the ladies
and widows to be married from the city and surrounding areas were reviewed,
without the slightest clue being able to put them on the track.

Finally, at two o'clock in the morning, we parted on this conclusion, that it
must have been a love under the rock.

There was indeed a wife under the rock, indeed, but no love.
Hector was simply promised to a young girl who, for seventeen
years past, it was held in reserve. Her name was Aurélie Blandureau
and lived in Paris. The friends did not know this detail.

In the past, when he timidly started business with the
other people's capital, M. Malestrat had had a partner, M. Blandureau.

Soon this associate grew weary. He didn't understand much about
transactions he made, then he found the fortune too slow in coming
in Bordeaux. He left for Paris, founded a brokerage firm and
married. Marriage and home prospered; he already had better than five hundred
thousand francs when his wife gave him a daughter. Mr. Malestrat, chosen
for godfather, made, on this occasion, the trip to Paris with his son,
ten years old.

The very evening of the baptism, after a magnificent dinner where we drank
prodigiously to the health of the mother, the two partners swore to each other
to marry their children together. There were no tickets exchanged or
of stipulated forfeiture; but we know what a good word is worth.

For both families, this union became something as certain as
if the mayor had passed through it with his scarf. When Mr. Blandureau
wrote, always asking for news of his daughter's husband. Mr.
Malestrat, for his part, never failed to inquire about the wife of
his son.

Hector had always heard of "this affair" as something
stopped. No one asked his opinion. Besides, what did he care?
He had only been warned that Mademoiselle's eighteen years
Blandureau were the deadline.

During M. Malestrat's reverses, there could have been a rupture. The shipowner
wrote to his friend, as soon as he saw clearly in his situation, for him
to confess that he no longer had even a hundred thousand livres a year, and he
give his word. But M. Blandureau did not hear it that way.

"What's done is done," he wrote nobly, as the
mail. My daughter will have a dowry of fifteen hundred thousand francs; I'm worried
little money. If you no longer had an obol, our words stand
still."

When his father died, Hector would not allow his word to be protested.
He continued the correspondence with M. Blandureau. Each year, at
first of January and on the day of Sainte-Aurélie, he had the
railroad a crate of gifts. These attentions were worth a
formal commitment and explain Hector's abrupt decision: it was not
more than a matter of "commercial probity."

Besides, he knew nothing of his fiancée, except that her name was
Aurélie, that she was tall and dark, and that she had been brought up in
Sacred Heart.




II


An excellent system for not reconsidering a determination is to
get away with the means. Thus did Hector: he burned his ships in
writing to his future father-in-law to announce to him "that, at the end of September, he
would remind him of a commitment dear to his heart.

Immediately he seriously thought about his departure. It was not a
little job: he had to put his affairs in order and liquidate a
stormy past.

Expecting to return to Bordeaux only with his wife, he wanted nothing
leave behind who could betray the secret of the past years. He
dreaded the fate of certain husbands that forgotten specters come
pull by their feet when they fall asleep peacefully. He took some
precautions and wanted guarantees. Before throwing away his memories
sea, he took care to ballast them with a good big stone which
prevented it from ever returning to float to the surface.

The last act of this sacrifice was the inventory of his trophies of
seducer. He had locked himself in with a big fire in the fireplace to
the auto-da-fe. By rummaging with both hands in the drawer of his
secretary, it seemed to him that he was stirring up the ashes of his heart.
It was a return on himself, an examination of conscience which more than one
times made him blush.

Everything passed without pity, if not without regrets: faded ribbons, bouquets
withered, microscopic portraits, rings, brown silky curls or
blondes, tickets scented with violets or verbena, everything, everything. HAS
each letter however he stopped. New writing, wasn't it?
not a new chapter?

He watched with a sigh the smoke fly away, rolling in its spirals
bluettes of paper where the letters for a moment appeared in
strokes of fire.

This smoke, was it not his youth?

And while with the tweezers he fanned the flame, he wondered
just what those relics of forgotten promises represented,
lying oaths, illusions, true love, tears or
remorse.

When there was only a heap of ashes above which
fluttered some debris, like black butterflies, he uttered a
sigh of satisfaction.

--Let's go! he said to himself, it's over, I'm free, I'm another man.

The next day he sent for his upholsterer. It was, in his absence,
to change all the furnishings. Then he delivered his hotel to the painters,
who, from the cellars to the attics, had to redo everything, restore everything. By
this last act of his will, he voluntarily put himself at the door of
his home.

It was at the end of June, when his last PPC visits
done, Hector left Bordeaux. Three more months separated him from his
first interview with his future. He wasn't embarrassed. He had
thought that a trip to Switzerland is the essential preface to a wedding,
and he was gone.

It was going the schoolboy way, but all roads lead to Rome.
Hector was happy to have some time in front of him to reflect
and prepare properly. We do not enter into an idea too
easily than in a pair of slippers, and he had to
familiar with his. He practiced the serious kind that befits
the man about to become a father, and he found that this
looked good on him. He had ordered clothes from his tailor
with a serious cut, because he had recognized the truth of the old
proverb: the habit makes the monk.

After less than a month of exercise, a veritable metamorphosis had taken place
fulfilled in him. Several times he caught himself believing that he was
actually married, and for several years; did he have the opportunity to
talking with a young woman, he involuntarily assumed a tone
paternal.

But no matter how much he wandered around Switzerland for six weeks, he
had eyes not to see, he looked at nothing. The most beautiful
landscapes found him indifferent, his mind was elsewhere.

Little by little, without realizing it, he had managed to rise
imagination. Not in a hurry to arrive, at the start, suddenly he
was consumed with impatience. He counted the days and even the hours. the
shimmer of the unknown attracted him invincibly. He happened to
sigh for Mademoiselle Aurélie, and, a more serious symptom, he
didn't find it ridiculous.

So much so that a month before the appointed time, he awoke in Tours, in
six hours from Paris. How had this happened? He wondered
when his reason returned.

He yearned to arrive. In the distance of the calendar, the house of Mr.
Blandureau seemed to him like the promised land. There reigned Aurélie.
He only had to go to the station, get a ticket, the same evening
he would be near her. What a temptation!

But what! to arrive thus unexpectedly, to fall into a house like a
demolition notice! Wouldn't this be seen as proof of bad taste, a
not very delicate defiance, a feeling of inferiority? The accuracy in
deadline is less about being ready a fortnight in advance
only to find oneself in a position at the right time. He made himself violent and decided
that he would expect.

But what to do, in Tours, alone, for four eternal weeks?

He had to choose between these two alternatives: retrace his steps, or
take advantage of his last hours of freedom, studying incognito
Parisian life.

Hector just didn't know Paris. He had come there as a child;
but, since he was of the age of reason, he had never wanted to
set foot again. He dreaded the disenchantments of returning. After
six months from the Boulevard des Italiens, would he be satisfied with the Fossés de
stewardship? Perhaps Bordeaux would then seem petty and
small, he would have regrets. He did not attempt the adventure, not wanting
to leave his town, where he had a superiority that would not consecrate
Paris. He preferred to be the first in the second city of France,
than the second in the first: pure Caesar.

But, on the eve of a wedding, he was afraid of Paris and also of
himself. The conversion was too fresh. In fact, it would be wrong to
choose the big city, to make a retreat there before his wedding. All
the temptations of Saint Anthony pay their impositions there and
walk around in silk robes. Hector told himself that once married he would have
all the time to go exploring. It was an expedient to keep in mind.
reserve, a pear for future thirst.

However, to continue the trade of wandering lover did not smile on him.

He was at the end of his deliberations and expedients, when, just in time
he remembered one of his good childhood friends, who must have planted
his tent on the banks of the Loire, somewhere between Blois and Tours.

This friend had often come to see him in Bordeaux, and each time had
conjured to pay him his visits. He had promised, because the
promises cost nothing; he had thought, moreover, of keeping his
word, but always at the last moment some impediment was
occurred. However, he was very fond of this former college friend, he
esteemed him, and he felt an extreme pleasure in seeing him again.

At this moment he clung to this memory with the eagerness
the drowning man grabbing a branch. He dressed in haste and
ran for information.

Everyone in Tours knows Mr. Ferdinand Aubanel. He lives, at five
small leagues, a beautiful property, La Fresnaie. In pompous praise
made for him of his friend, Hector concluded that the tent must have been a
chateau.

He had nothing more to learn. He had quickly found a carriage, and,
while driving on the path that leads to Fresnaie, he repeated to himself
it's good to have friends everywhere.




III


The vehicle moved slowly, the horses, as they say, trotted
on the spot, the driver was half asleep. Hector did not dream of
complain. Sunk in an aimless reverie, he let himself go
monotonous rocking of the car; his mind rested contemplating
these tranquil landscapes of Touraine.

The road was beautiful. Sometimes clinging to the side of a shady hill,
it dominated the course of the Loire; sometimes she sank into something
fresh valley, with a thousand sinuosities that softened the slopes.

Soon we took a side road.

"Here we are advancing," said the conductor.

And with a whiplash he roused his lean horses, whose pace
however, did not change.

Already everything announced the neighborhood of some wealthy habitation. The eye
of the master had to watch over there. Hedges were fine
maintained, aligned and without empty spaces, the raised ditches
carefully, the trees pruned in such a way as to provide shade without
the path was damaged by the humidity.

We passed two farms, lurking in clumps of abalone like
nests; further on, it was the pointed roof of a dovecote that could be seen
dominating the peaks. We cut, in a meadow, the regrowth a little in
late this year, and the smell of hay filled the air. In a pen
neatly surrounded by fences, thoroughbred horses grazed. At
noise of the car, they lifted their intelligent heads; mon
of them, the favorite no doubt, advanced to the posts of the little
doorway, stretching her slender collar over the boards.

Then the house appeared, in the distance, at the end of a long, long
avenue of chestnut trees. It was not a castle strictly speaking,
but one of those good big unpretentious bourgeois houses,
flanked by two slightly backward wings, comfortable, hospitable, with
a whole floor devoted to guest rooms.

Near the gate a servant was standing, as if in the limelight, his hand
in front of the eyes, because of the sun; he seemed to interrogate the car,
probably to report the visitor faster.

"Someone is doubtless expected," said Hector to himself; I have no chance
in truth, I may perhaps be importunate.

But advancing he recognized the servant for having seen him in Bordeaux
with his friend. He also seemed to recognize Hector, for he was making
signs with his hat.

When the car stopped in the yard:

--Ah! sir, said this man to Hector, here you are at last! my master
was dying of impatience waiting for you.

"They were expecting me?"

He could not hear the answer, Ferdinand had run up and hugged him.
in his arms to suffocate him.

--Ah! thank you! he said to her, thank you, it's very good what you're doing there. You
you are a true friend, and you prove it; I knew very well that you
would come. You received my letter and you left everything.

--My dear friend, for three months I have been absent from Bordeaux, the desire
to see you alone brought me. I didn't receive your letter, and by chance...

--Is! it's chance, let's bless it. He did everything, but I'm not
not surprised; chance is at my command now. I am the man
happier. What do you want? I will wish it for you, you will be
fulfilled. My happiness makes me tremble; it is not natural. But I
stand there, in the middle of the yard, I'm losing my mind, follow me. I have the most
urgent need of your advice, come; maybe you want to
refresh?

And Ferdinand, in a loud voice, called his servants to give them instructions.
orders: the whole house was in the air. So he dragged his friend, but he
still did not let go of his arm, he pressed it under his own, as much
in fear of seeing him flee only to make sure of the reality of
Her presence.

And along the corridors, on the stairs, he continued, out of breath
to speak:

--If I wrote to you to come running, it's because I want your signature on my
contract, you are my witness, I am getting married, dear Hector, the day after tomorrow. A
young girl, no, an angel, and beautiful, beautiful... But you will see her: I
love it, or rather I adore it. And to say that the day after tomorrow she will be mine,
me alone, forever; wow, this idea is driving me crazy. I'm shaking
let it be a dream; if you are my friend, don't wake me up.
The day after tomorrow... but how long! it's an eternity, will I live
until there? The days have twenty-four hours and the hours sixty
minutes: I'll have white hair by then. And she loves me, yes, my
friend, she loves me, she told me, she'll tell you again if you want, she
Her name is Herminia. Soon we will go up to the attic, I
will show his house; her, you will see her this evening; but come, come.

"It's a rage," thought Hector, "everyone gets married; I did well
make up my mind, I wouldn't have found a wife if I had waited. Be
blessed, O my father, with your wise foresight!

We were on the first floor. Ferdinand opened a door, and stepping aside
in front of his friend:

"Come in," he said to her, "come in, it's my room, my bachelor's room; I
won't live there long, we'll have another one here, next door; the
upholsterers are putting the finishing touches to it. It's a masterpiece, a nest
satin... But forgive me, dear Hector, wait, be careful, I'm going to
find a chair.

He succeeded, not without difficulty. Chaos had taken up residence in the
a bachelor's room, confusion reigned supreme there. The objects
more disparate had been piled up there as if at will, bed, table,
chest of drawers, chairs; everything was cluttered. The floor itself was not
free, nor without danger; two boxes barely gutted were placed in
through; next to it lay debris, planks with their nails in
the air, pincers, a hammer, a carpenter's chisel.

Near the window, a well-dressed gentleman was standing. He bowed
respectfully when the two friends entered. He was holding a
small strip of oilcloth, with numbers in gold, his yardstick at last.

"He's my tailor," said Ferdinand to his friend, "he's just arrived from Paris with
these two chests which are full of clothes. For a month he
works only for me.

--And you pretend to try all that?

--Without a doubt, you will see it well. Moreover, you will be a judge.
This is where your advice becomes indispensable to me; aren't you the king
fashion, or rather fashion in person? Just looking at a waistcoat,
you gotta give it right way.

He spoke thus, while undressing. The tailor, with a serious air,
presented the clothes that Ferdinand put on one after the
others. He never got tired, he couldn't find any he liked.

--Alas! he moaned, my figure is pitiful, I realize that
today; I had illusions. Look, Hector, look, am I
fairly common, fairly clumsy? you find me grotesque, don't you?
My dear tailor, your clothes fit abominably; those pants are too much
short, this waistcoat too long: one fattens me beyond measure, the other
crushes my chest.

The tailor went to great lengths. Everything was going well and
"advantaged sir." Never had he seen a more charming turn or
found more difficult customer.

And we tried again.

"Also, it's true," said Ferdinand, "have we ever seen more ridiculous fashions
than ours! The stovepipe hat killed heroism. So be
handsome, noble, poetic with that rag we call a black coat!
All of humanity seems to come out of the same mold! Belvedere Apollo
today would look like a hairdresser. The gallantry disappeared with the
wedge stockings, the spirit fled with the powder.

"Raise your arm a little, sir," said the tailor; well, so.
Now turn your head, that's it.

"With your ideas," resumed Hector, "you had to get married in carnival, you
could have chosen a suit to your liking, taken the cuirass of the
crusades, shoes à la poulaine, Louis XIII boots, hats
braided with gold, the patent jerkin, and the marvelous tie. You
had to make your choice the costume shop of the
Porte Saint-Martin.

--You think you are laughing, my friend, and you have just issued a great and fruitful
idea. But now, seriously, see... am I worthy of her, of her, if
beautiful, so graceful, so poetic? No, I'm awful, I would like
have a fairy godmother; like Peau-d'Ane, I would have made pants
from a side of the nude, a sun-colored waistcoat, and a coat cut in
the wing of a butterfly.

"Monsieur is very well like that," affirmed the tailor; if sir wants
walk a bit.

Ferdinand took a few steps.

--Very well! insisted Hector.

It was time, the boxes were empty. It remained to settle the way of
wear the black dress.

Ferdinand wanted it buttoned up to the collar, after the manner of M. de
Girardin.

Hector insisted on the open coat; it's more ceremonial.

The tailor insisted that it be fastened with "a double button;" he
had brought it on purpose. He named seven or eight of his clients, all more
noble as each other, who have adopted this fashion.

We discussed, but nothing was decided. Ferdinand declared that he would
relied on the inspiration that always comes at the supreme moment.

The tailor was free, but not Hector. He had to say his opinion on the
basket.

It had been placed in the large living room, on the tea table.

It was a piece of furniture of exquisite taste, as it sometimes comes out of
Tahan, the work was infinitely delicate. It was a big
oval chest, in rosewood with inlays. The handles and
the silver locks must have been chiselled by fairies.

Hector thought he would buy the like for Mademoiselle Blandureau.

--Well! what do you say? Ferdinand asked.

--Admirable.

--That was my opinion. What saddens me is that she will be too much
small, and then how to do?

This pretty piece of furniture seemed to Hector of a very respectable size. But,
Looking around the living room, he understood his friend's concerns.

No doubt he had robbed the ten most sumptuous stores in Paris
to bring together all the wonders he wanted to offer his wife.

Hector seriously admired cashmeres and laces,
caskets, fabrics, jewelry, fans. He assessed it all at
a considerable sum.

--My aunt and I ran for a fortnight to buy all this, said
Ferdinand.

"Well, she lent her hand to some fine follies. Did you by chance
inherited a kingdom, or are you going to ruin yourself?

--To ruin me! impossible. I tried it three times, for me
distract, before knowing Herminie. I did not succeed. As soon as
I chipped away at my capital, vlan! I had an inheritance. On this train
I would have reduced my family to myself. I stopped. This does not
costs nothing, it's the estate of one of my uncles. Everything happened, but
it's not paying too much for a smile from Herminie. Provided that the trash
not be too narrow. Well, it's my aunt's business, she'll be
here tomorrow early, because tomorrow is when I send the basket.
Let's go to dinner.

"Decidedly," thought Hector, "the head is gone."

At least the stomach was still strong. Ferdinand proved it well to
table. He ate like four, while talking. But he had barely
swallowed the last mouthful, that he got up, and, willy-nilly, dragged
Hector.

"I am going to pay my fiancee a visit," he said to her, "it will be the third
today. I have to introduce you, you understand; aren't you my
best friend? I have often spoken of you, we know you. It's at one
half a league from here; we'll go on foot, if you want it, I need some air and
of movement.

As they advanced along the road that leads from La Fresnaie to
Cormes-Ecluse where the future family of Ferdinand lived, Hector could
notice that his friend's verve was dying out. When he entered
in the living room, all the colors of the rainbow appeared in turn on
his face, he stammered as he introduced Hector.

--Devil, thought this one, it seems that it is very serious.

And he watched out of the corner of his eye Mademoiselle's countenance
Stoat. She had become redder than a peony. She stops talking
raised to make a small bow, very shy, but almost
immediately she sat down again. An embroidery she was holding seemed
absorb all his attention. But Hector noticed that his hands
were shaking so hard she could barely hold her needle. Then,
although she had her head bent over her work and her eyes lowered, he
could see the look she gave Ferdinand.

Her whole soul had passed into that moist and soft gaze, full of confessions
naive and candid promises.

"She loves him," he said to himself, "well! so much the better! he's a good boy, he
Deserves that.

And while Ferdinand approached his betrothed, he remained near the
parents; he spoke of indifferent things, of the Switzerland he had never
not seen, from Bordeaux. When he stopped for a moment, he heard the
whispering of lovers seated near the worktable, so close that
their hair was confused.

The whole house was in motion. Nearby, there were seamstresses
who completed the trousseau. In the kitchen, in the office, we prepared the
big dinner which the next day was to precede the contract.

We had to go see the dresses. Ferdinand went out with his fiancée and his
mother. Hector was left alone with the father, who took advantage of this opportunity to
start praising his future son-in-law. He seemed not to have to dry up.

The two friends returned in the evening, by a path which had the reputation
to cut as short as possible, and much longer than the road in reality.
Ferdinand went first, lighting up the march, he pushed aside the
slatted fences that separate the fields and warned his friend
when there was a ditch to jump.

On the threshold of the room prepared for the traveler, they parted
with a final handshake, wishing each other well
night.

Hector recognized one of those good big rooms, which await the
beloved visitor in the rich houses of the countryside, and get along
with the masters to keep him there for a long time. The comfortable life of
family was bursting on all sides. There, at least, neither air nor space
had been measured by an architect complicit in the sordid stinginess
of the owner. The ceiling was four meters high, we could have entered
drive through the windows. As soon as you enter, a good armchair
stretched out its arms and invited you to the sweetness of the contemplative life.

Hector gave a cry of joy, he felt at home. And there
had been wiping the dust from the inns for two months, breaking at the
hard chairs, stiffening from the dampness of the beds, doubting everything,
even sometimes of the scrupulous virginity of linen. Also, with
what delights he inhaled the iris scent of fine towels
canvas, as he marveled at the whiteness of the sheets, dazzling
like snow.

And he undressed in a hurry, he promised his poor body ten
hours of good sleep, neither more nor less, with closed fists.

He reckoned without his host.

His ideas were barely confused when Ferdinand entered in his robe.
room; he sat casually on the foot of the bed.

He had a thousand things of the greatest importance to confide to his friend.
And under this pretext, he spouted the most unheard-of extravagances.
Hector laughed at his follies, and from time to time tried to dismiss him.
But Ferdinand braved sleep, and he always had something to
add.--"Here, listen again, I'm going after."

Finally in the morning, as five o'clock struck, Hector succeeded in
throw him out, by dint of reasoning, and also by pushing him a
little by the shoulders.

But it's a waste of time running after sleep that's gone. Hector saw it
good. Already the house was filled with morning noises.

In the yard, they had just brought the new car, the carriage of the
wedding; the shed doors were opened, the stable boys
were called. In the corridors resounded the noisy hoofs of
servants, the ban and the backbench of the vassals had been summoned
to "lend a hand" on this solemnity. The Tours glacier was coming,
with its sonorous utensils, copper or tin molds, buckets and
clogs; it sounded like the carillon of a village church traveling by
cart. Everything was being unpacked noisily. The stairs were groaning,
shaken by the steps of a battalion of workers. The upholsterers
put up banquettes for the ball; along the ramp they hoisted
their double scales. The whole building shook from the impact of the hammers,
while with a great deal of nails they were going up the hangings.

Soon, dominating the tumult, the voice of Ferdinand resounded, he called
everyone at once, men and women, he was shouting the whole calendar
by the window. His aunt, old Miss Aubanel, came
to arrive.

Hector took a heroic step. He got up and went down. Fernando
decidedly beat the countryside; he replaced him and became aide-de-camp
from the aunt. Under his orders he led the undisciplined army of
servants and workers. He saw to everything with coolness and
captain's presence of mind on a stormy day.

Ferdinand had disappeared.

"You would do well, my nephew," his aunt had told him, "to go and return
visit to your future.

He hadn't had it repeated twice.

Finally, it was all over, or almost. There is always something missing
thing, but we must know when to stop: the best is the enemy of the good. HAS
barely had time to run to dinner, half a league away
not taking the shortest.

It was a five-point dinner, long and lavish, a meal like
orders them in Touraine; Gamache, if he came back to earth, would choose this
country for her wedding. The table was bent under the weight of bottles and
glasses, the light sparkled on the facet of the crystals. There was
thirty-eight people around the table, and at least two dishes per
guest. All knew each other and were even somewhat related. Hector
would have seemed foreign, but Ferdinand had talked, talked a lot. We
lives their intimacy, the grateful looks of the aunt at her help from
camp, and he was treated like family. An old cousin exclaimed, "He
there is only one more parent." We laugh. That evening we laughed at everything and
nothing. Hector had wit, and seemed witty, which is better, what
what we say. The future was proud of his friend, a little more and he would have
trimmed his buttonhole. From time to time he ceased to look at his fiancée to
smile at him and thank him for bringing his share of enthusiasm
and gaiety.

But now, at the end, two gentlemen dressed all in black, the collar
stretched with the starch of a white tie, got up and silently
went into the living room.

"These gentlemen are the notaries," said one of her neighbors to Hector.

We followed them. The chairs in the living room had been prepared for
forward, in a circle. We took our places. In the middle, on the table, feathers
of swans, immaculate, were waiting for the signature, near a large
vermeil writing desk.

The older of the two notaries was up, he had put on his glasses,
he held the contract in his hand. A deep silence ensues. In
listening, one would have heard the beating of the heart of the future.

The reading began.

The old notary, in a monotonous tone, enumerated the clauses and
conditions, the surnames and first names "of the spouses;" he hesitated from time to time
another, when he found a difficult word, and he even mumbled. He
stammered every time he came to these technical passages,
as obligatory as they are useless, which are like the framework of all
acts. At the end of each sentence, he raised his voice and resumed
breath; he made "outfits" by turning the pages. Sentences
were so long, so long, that he had to start three
times, and, twisted as they were, and bristling with barbaric words,
nests of lawsuits were to hide in their recesses.

The old cousin, of an apoplectic temperament, grumbled between his
teeth. Such a reading, after one of those dinners which make
of digestion, seemed to him like an ambush. Hector felt
seized by an invincible sleep. Ferdinand fidgeted in his chair like
Guatimozin on his grill, he was not on a bed of roses.

Finally it ended, this interminable contract; the notary read in a tone
happy the last sentences, everyone got up to sign.

Hector, half awake, had done like everyone else.

Standing, he waited his turn, the notary had first "passed the pen
to the ladies." His gaze wandered carelessly around the living room,
complacent to satisfied faces, when by chance his eyes
stopped on the table.

He then saw, holding the pen, a hand so cute, so delicate, so
perfect, that he was dazzled by it.

She had, this little hand, an indescribable grace; the fingers were
long and tapered, slightly curved at the first phalanx and
coquettishly rolled up; the fingernails were pink and narrow, with
pearly shimmer at the root; they stood out clearly on the skin
of a firm and lively whiteness; she had the complexion of a child,
lights she seemed transparent, and under the supple fabric of the skin
we followed the blue sinuosities of the veins, as if the blood had flowed
open air. A wrist of divine purity, of a delicacy
infinite, attached this hand to the white arm, half lost under the
sleeve lace.

Hector marveled at these charming details. By a movement
instinctively he approached, pushing aside the men standing in front of him, and
which hid from him the one to whom belonged this hand of such magnificent
perfection.

"Unfortunately," he said to himself, "a woman of at least thirty-five
alone can have such a hand.

He was wrong. It was the hand of a very young girl, eighteen years old
barely, beautiful as a dream, poetic enough to hatch sonnets in
the brain of a stockbroker. She had the hair of an admirable
blond, luminous, with those warm tints that are the pride of beautiful
Venetians. Artlessly twisted by the vigorous wrist of a rustic
chambermaid, they were held back by a comb that disappeared
entirely under the golden waves; so supple, so abundant, that at all
instant one could fear or hope to see them break the bond which
restrained them, and spreads, like a golden cloak, over shoulders whose
you could make out the exquisite contours under a little Virgin's wimple,
closed at the collar with a lace ruffle.

"Where did I have my eyes?" Hector wondered. What! I did not have
noticed again this radiant beauty.

And he forgot to take up the pen, although his turn had come and the
notary would have called him three times.

Then we left for the town hall of the village, a few hundred
hardly. Hector had offered his arm to the old lady
Aubanel, he dragged him away, quickly, too quickly; he was eager to find
the blonde girl.

He could only join her in the hall of the town hall. She was leaning
on the arm of the old cousin, careless, ignorant of her admirable
beauty. He was talking, and she was smiling as she listened. An innocent mischief
sparkled in his big blue eyes. Has some more joke
amusing than the others, she burst out laughing; so her pink lips
bared her teeth, fine and shining like pearls.

"We're not prettier," murmured Hector, returning to the house of
his friend.

He locked himself in his room, and when Ferdinand, like the day before,
wanted to enter, he vigorously refused to open, swearing that he was asleep,
and that he would not even get up to put out the fire if he
home.

But a sweet vision kept him awake for a long time.

"If Mademoiselle Aurélie could resemble her!"

The next day was the big day. For a long time still marriage at the
town hall will only be a boring formality, an act in front of a big
gentleman whom we often know too well, and to whom the tricolor scarf
lends no majesty.

At eleven o'clock--we get married in full sun, in Touraine--a dozen
large open carriages came to take the guests. It was
the most beautiful weather in the world, the sky was celebrating. We never
saw a happier, more smiling wedding. It was like one of those beautiful
mornings that promise a radiant day.

There were flowers everywhere; the coachmen had big bouquets to
their breasts, with streams of white ribbons; the horses were more
garlanded than a sheep in the St. John's Day procession. Along the
paths stopped groups of peasants and peasants. Men
were waving their hats, the women were cheering.

The cars rolled slowly on the sand of the alleys, in the middle of
these beautiful landscapes of the Loire which inspire the desire to
plowman, by charming roads which reduce walkers to
envy the fate of the rural postman who travels through them every day.

After the ceremony, under the porch, Hector found the young girl of the
Eve. His friend was passing, he called him.

"What is, please," he asked her, "this delicious
no one?

"One of our neighbours," said the other negligently.

And, stretching out his arm in the direction of the horizon:

"Here, his mother lives in that little chateau, which you see over there halfway up the hill,
like a white dot in the middle of the trees.

She was the bride's bridesmaid, and it was customary for Hector
his servant rider.

All the rest of the day, laughing, chattering like the free birds that
chirped in the elms of the park, she hung on his arm. They
went, both, following the groups of friends in the great alleys of the
garden and along the arbors.

He had to tell her the story of his friendship with Ferdinand, and
how he had decided to come. His questions had this superb
assurance of a candor that ignores everything. Once or twice Hector was so
surprised, that he let him see. So she stopped on him her big
trembling eyes. But soon she regained her carefree serenity. And
blessed him with the easy chat theme she gave him, for
really he would not have known what to say to her. Near her he was short even of
those frivolous nonsense, those elegant platitudes, which are the
counterfeit currency of a spiritual conversation exchanged by
unknown.

Sometimes, while listening, she bent down to catch a
flower, which she plucked mechanically. She then leaned more
firmly on Hector's arm so as not to fall, and he admired
the elegant suppleness of her waist; or else it was a branch that
embarrassed herself in the folds of her white crepe dress, and that she
laughed. She pricked her fingers and quickly carried them to
his mouth, and nibbled them with the tips of his little white teeth.

Surprised, delighted, Hector gave himself up gently to this irresistible
seduction of innocence. So many modest and naive graces held him
so well under the spell, that he did not even try to analyze the
new sensations which intoxicated him.

Placed near her, at the table, he cursed those who spoke to him.
word and forced him to answer, but he watched him curiously and
smiled when, timidly, she dipped her lip in the precious wine
which was poured into muslin glasses.

At six o'clock sharp--it was still broad daylight--violins
creaked. The ball began under the arbor, later it was to
continue into the living room.

At the first chords she had risen, Hector had followed her.

All night he danced, like a schoolboy on vacation, wiping his
forehead after each quadrille, reaching out to all the trays.

Waltzes, polkas, masurkes, he stopped at nothing. We could have
take for one of those poor supernumeraries who have their appointment
in their shoes. Mademoiselle Aubanel could not help him
compliment. He didn't hear her. A remnant of caution whispered to
his ear:

--You can invite him at most once out of five.

And he invited all the women, young, ugly, old, pretty, and
for all of them, he had charming attentions, phrases
spiritually flattering.

He had never been so satisfied in his life. He cared about the world
really, right now; he enjoyed for himself; even he hoped
Probably the ball would last forever, until Judgment Day,
since he had made invitations for the thirty-seventh
contredanse.

But suddenly, at three o'clock in the morning, no one saw
more the bride. The bride had disappeared.--What has become of the bride?

This was the signal for the retreat, which soon turned into a rout,
despite the efforts of the old cousin, who was trying to organize a cotillion
and threatened the fleeing dancers with the policeman. He
cried out for Hector's assistance.

Hector had just offered his arm to the charming blonde and was driving her
with his mother to their car. The vestibule was cluttered; we
was looking for shawls and coats.

She made a mischievous little pout.

"How early we leave, Mama," she would say.

"And quickly, quickly, my daughter," said the mother, "cover your neck well, and your
shoulders, and your arms; the air is cold outside, the fluxes of
chest run the paths, watching for the imprudent, and quickly, quickly,
this shawl, and this ball gown, and this scarf, and this big fat
coat, and again this scarf on your head.

And the girl was shivering and laughing. Embarrassed in fabrics,
like a mummy in her bandages, she could barely walk.
Hector supported her, or rather carried her to the carriage; he then helped
the mother spreading a large traveling blanket over her; both
thanked him.

The coachman whipped the horses.

Hector remained alone on the steps, surprised, sad, like the dreamer who
sees a happy dream fly away, like the child who looks down at the
debris from his favorite toy.

He had noticed that the car had lanterns brighter than
the others: as long as he could, he followed their gleams through the
windings of the road; they appeared or disappeared according to
the slopes, like will-o'-the-wisps in the countryside.

He lost sight of them, but he hoped to see them again from the windows of the
salon. He went up very quickly, and, his forehead against the window, he
searched for a long time through the trees, in the shadows.

The living room was empty. In the distance, we could hear the rolling of the last
cars that got lost in the night. The servants, weary,
shuffled back and forth. They put out the lights and
the candles were blowing out.

Hector was resigning himself to going back to his room when Ferdinand, looking
terrified, crossed the living room like a hurricane.

He stopped her by the arm, in spite of himself, almost by force.

--What is her name? he asked.

--She, who? my wife? Stoat.

--Hey! it's your wife!

But Ferdinand had managed to free himself, he was already far away.




IV


Her name was Louise d'Ambleçay and she had just turned seventeen.

His mother, Madame la Baronne d'Ambleçay, was left a widow after a short
years of a happy marriage. Still young, rich, determined never to
to remarry, she did not have the courage to separate from her only daughter,
and wanted to take charge of his education herself.

She had as helpers in this difficult task an old abbé, strong
learned, very witty, even more original, and a teacher
English. Miraculously, this Englishwoman was an excellent musician; by
a greater miracle, she was by no means romantic. The priest and
the teacher are still part of the family today; without any
doubt, they will end their days at the Château d'Ambleçay, chatting, without
to be able to agree, their system of education. Because they each have
a system. It is true that they did not try it on their pupil.

Thus, Louise had the rare happiness of avoiding boarding houses and convents,
whose air is so often fatal to young girls. An unhealthy sheep has
sooner does a wolf destroy a whole herd, and the more
severe vigilance often cannot ward off such sheep. Finally the
young ladies bring back from the best of the houses of education number of
prejudices and foolish ideas, which later, in the world, they have
a thousand pains to get rid of.

To this education, under the eyes of her mother, Louise owed this
adorable ignorance, that instinctive grace, that serene naivete, his
greatest charms, long before her rare beauty.

Madame d'Ambleçay lived very retired. Damaged in her pain, to death
of her husband, she had taken refuge in his castle, refusing to see
nobody. Later, when time had dried its tears and brought back a
smile on her lips, she no longer wanted to change her way of life.
She thought that the pleasures of the world were not worth those of a calm
retirement.

However, she received some of her relatives from Tours, all of whom
the years, in turn, came to spend a fortnight at the chateau. She
also had visits from four or five country neighbours, formerly
friends of her husband, good gentlemen who, despite their nobility, had
the good spirit not to be or not to appear discontented, and which,
extraordinarily, never spoke politics, at least in front of
women.

Several times already, in the country, people had been surprised that Madame
d'Ambleçay did not seem to be thinking of "establishing" his daughter. Some
indiscreet even,--of those mothers who lead their young ladies to all
the balls of the prefecture and the general receipt, with the fixed idea
to find a good match there--had, on this point, interrogated her at
point blank.

Madame d'Ambleçay usually replied that there was no hurry.

Thereupon, good souls had charitably spread the rumor that
the baroness sacrificed Louise to her maternal selfishness, that she
ruthlessly sequestered, determined to make him, willy-nilly,
do Saint Catherine's hair.

Hector quickly learned all these details and many more, for
his friend's wife. Madame Aubanel was precisely the best, or
more like Louise's only friend. So she became the confidante of the young
man, without his suspecting it. He looked for opportunities to
to be alone with her, and, whenever he could, he
grabbed his arm. He stormed with eagerness
Ferdinand, whom he found very ridiculous with his youthful gallantry
married.

It must be said that, while always and constantly talking about Mademoiselle
d'Ambleçay, Hector tried and thought to assume the most detached and
the most selfless in the world. But he was doing poorly. Without her
concern, he would have caught malicious smiles on the lips of the
young woman. She thought she saw clearly in the heart of the friend of
Ferdinand.

Alas! he saw nothing of it himself, at least in the first days.
If he concealed it, it was in very good faith. He was the first to
take the change.

If he stayed at La Fresnaie, he who had promised himself so well to leave as soon as
the day after his friend's wedding, he couldn't do
otherwise. He proved it to himself.

He had no shortage of pretexts, nor excellent reasons. There
There is not, in Touraine, a good party without a future, a wedding without a "return."
It is to whom, parents and friends, will receive the newlyweds. The
spindles turn for a fortnight, the violins rage every
nights; balls, dinners, country parties follow one another without
interruption. For this madness of pleasures to calm down, it is necessary that
all the kindred is on the teeth.

Could Hector refuse the invitations that rained down like
hail? Certainly not. It would have been to insult his friend.

And everywhere he found Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay, whose mother, for this
marriage of a friend of his daughter, had given up his habits
of isolation.

Less warned, Hector would certainly have noticed the singular change
which took place in the character of the young girl. She, so laughing, so
expansive on the first day, she became more and more reserved. HAS
contrary to what usually happens, he intimidated her more
as she got to know him better.

He did not make this remark, he who flattered himself that he knew the
women, because the most skilful seducer loses his means as soon as
the moment he loves seriously, as well as the best actor
would become execrable if he really felt the passion he
strives to render.

However, the days passed, and each evening Hector packed his trunk
to undo it the next day. He cursed himself for being so weak; he
found it inappropriate and even a little ridiculous to remain there, as a third party
on a honeymoon, to play the role of spoilsport, scarecrow to
lover. Sometimes he felt remorseful.

"Poor Ferdinand," he thought, "must be fed up with me. There are
long time that in his place I would have very politely thrown out my voucher
friend Hector.

But Ferdinand was not so bad tempered. The presence of his friend
enchanted him. He said the prettiest things about love and friendship,
and blamed himself for nothing, except the excess of his happiness, which was beginning to
seriously worry him. He would have lived like this for a hundred years, without suspecting
of his friend's perplexities. He was warned by his wife.

It was one morning, the newlyweds were having lunch alone. From
dawn, Hector had gone to the fields under the very plausible pretext of
shoot a few partridges, in reality to go prowling a little on the side of the
castle of Madame d'Ambleçay. Ferdinand blessed this phoenix of friends,
who, in spite of his business,--for he must have had business,--their
spent several weeks in this way.

"Are you quite sure, my friend," asked Madame Aubanel, "that his only friendship
for you, for us, keep M. Malestrat at La Fresnaie?

--Parbleu! answered Ferdinand, his mouth full, what other
reason.....

--Who knows? some nice reason, very young, very blond .....

--Bah!...

"Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay, for example?"

--What, your friend, do you think? what an idea! But in fact, why not?
we say it very well, this young lady.

--We say it... as if you didn't know it.

--I know her; but you know very well, madam, that for two years I
haven't looked at any other woman but you.

--And I hope it will always be so.

"I swear it," said Ferdinand gravely. But back to your discovery.
Hector in love, it's incredible! How did he not tell me anything? this
would be the height of dissimulation, a crime of lese-friendship; I
I will be right, and certainly I will confess it.

The confession was made.

Hector's indecision had ceased, after three weeks of the most
cruel and most comic perplexities that ever troubled the
heart and mind of a lover.

The first time, the night of the ball, after a delicious day, Hector
didn't have time to think. He was not one of his
thoughts that were not to this adorable young girl, to Mademoiselle
d'Amblecay. He was under the spell.

Only the next day, the memory of Mademoiselle Blandureau, of this
stranger whom he was to marry, badly disturbed his happiness. He
quickly chased away this importunate idea, telling himself that he would have enough
all his life to think about the one who was going to be his wife, and he
thought more than Louise.

But he returned to the charge, this memory, more vivid, more pressing. At
in the midst of Hector's dreams, Mademoiselle Aurélie Blandureau stood
before him, cold and severe as remorse. She said:

"What are you doing, guilty bridegroom, what are you doing while I'm waiting for you?" You
forget, I see, that letter that barely two months ago you
wrote to my father. It's a horrible betrayal.

"Deign to excuse me, irritated shade," murmured Hector. You must well
understand that there is nothing serious in all this; I will leave and
I will forget the one you believe, quite wrongly, to be your rival.

"I'm your wife, or it's just like," resumed the shadow of
Miss Aurelie; now all your thoughts belong to me. You
no longer have the right to open your heart to another woman. Your father
has he, yes or no, given his word? You yourself have acknowledged the debt.
Is this how you claim to fulfill twice sacred commitments?
What will M. Blandureau, my too credulous father, say?

--Unfortunately, yes! murmured Hector, what will M. Blandureau say?

And he lowered his head like a culprit. He couldn't help
to admit that the shade of the unknown bride was right, and he
sought to disarm her with fine promises.

Finally, the day arrived when, after an examination of conscience, he had to confess
that he was seriously in love with Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay, but there,
seriously, for good. He was in love like never before
had been, as he did not believe one could be.

It was the height. Aurélie's shadow became inexorable. She pressed him,
tormented him, harassed him, tortured him night and day. He had not
no longer a moment of respite.

Taken as in an inextricable labyrinth, between the past and the
present, he saw no way out in the future. He was racking his brains
seek an expedient to reconcile what he called his duty and his
dearest desires. But like all men of imagination, he
only arrived at romantic and impossible combinations.

He was well disposed not to marry Mademoiselle Blandureau, but he
didn't want to take his word back. The idea of a bankruptcy on the day of
the deadline horrified him. It was the only way though. He the
rejected this plea, took it up again, pushed it aside, discussed it for a long time, and
finally had to bring himself to admit it.

"My father," he said to himself, "has entered into engagements; he didn't have it
straight. I made the mistake of ratifying these commitments myself. But
what did I promise in the end? to love Mademoiselle Blandureau. Gold,
love is only so beautiful because it is involuntary, and I love one
other. If I kept my word, I would be a dishonest man, because
I would ensure my misfortune and that of Aurélie. So I have to abstain.
There is force majeure; it's not a bankruptcy anymore, it's a bankruptcy
simple.

I have a right to a concordat.

Determined not to let slip the happiness that passed within reach of his
hand, he pursued his idea of rupture in all his developments.

What wrong was he doing Mademoiselle Aurélie? Certainly none. She does not
had never seen him, and so she could not love him; therefore, none
suffering. Being very rich, she would only have to choose between all the
parties that would run; so no harm.

All the difficulty for Hector was more than to ask his word to
Mr. Blandureau. This terrible prospect held him in suspense for two days.
Again. But he used up this remorse like the others. He decided that he
would write when it was all over, that is, when he had
asked for Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay's hand.

From then on he banished all worry, gave leave to the annoying memory of
Mademoiselle Aurélie, and, entirely devoted to his love, he waited for a
favorable occasion to declare oneself bravely.

Bravely is perhaps too much. Bold Hector had grown strong
shy. He would no doubt have waited a long time longer, when Madame
Aubanel precipitated events. For the hundredth, the thousandth time,
he had just brought up--awkwardly--the conversation about Mademoiselle
d'Amblecay.

"My presence here annoys her, then?" he asked; it was your
best friend, madam, and since your marriage she has not come
visit you only once.

--Ah! did you notice that? It's serious, said Madame Aubanel.

Ferdinand laughed. Hector blushed, stammered, became confused, but
none the less continued. Two minutes later he was at this
question that burned his lips:

"So she doesn't dream of getting married?"

--Hey! do I know? replied the young woman, smiling. He had to
ask, you who have danced so often with her.

"I thought about it," said Hector naively, "but I didn't dare.

--You had to dare.

--What! you believe... I could hope... she would have spoken to you...

--How you go! I don't believe anything, I don't know anything, I don't have anything
said.

--Ah! Madam, you are cruel, resumed Hector with discouragement; me
who was already thinking...

"To ask her in marriage?" Try... Only you will meet, I
fear, some difficulties...

"I am not noble, it is true.

--Oh! that wouldn't be a reason.

--What is it, then? Oh! Madam, please tell me...

--It's a secret.

It was too much for Ferdinand, who for five minutes had been doing
keep from laughing, superhuman efforts. Seeing the pitiful face
of his friend, on these words: "It's a secret," he burst out. He wasn't laughing
he was holding his ribs, he was writhing. He barely laughs
he left the way to articulate a few shreds of sentences.

"Speak, my friend," he said, "go on, dear Hector, you delight me. Ah!
if you could see yourself! you're too funny... No, you've never been so funny in your life
fun...

Her husband's laughter had won over Madame Aubanel. Hector stood up furiously.

--Well yes! he exclaimed, I love Mademoiselle Louise; what is it
so laughable at that?

And since no one answered him:

"Yes, I love her," continued he, "and my most ardent desire is to
marry him. And by the way, I will have the heart net. I will go ask
his hand, this very day, on the spot. I'm going right away to
Madame d'Ambleçay...

"And will you tell him?" Ferdinand asked.

--I will say to her: "Madame, I love your daughter, I do not think I am
not indifferent..."

"You are nothing but a fool.

"I repeat what your wife told me...

--Oh! for example, what horror! fi! sir, interrupted madam
Aubanel...

Hector glared at the young woman.

"I may," he resumed, "have been cruelly mistaken as to the meaning of certain
of your words; so I won't say that. No, I will say.... I
I will say... I... Hey! by my faith! I don't know what I will say; but I
I will speak, I will explain myself. In any case I will get out of this
frightful uncertainty that kills me. I can't bear the uncertainty,
it's like a toothache to me. And when a tooth prevents me from
sleep, I don't hesitate... I have her pulled out.

And he went out, leaving his friends in a new fit of gaiety.

--Parbleu! exclaimed Ferdinand, in a smug tone, the poor fellow has
lost his brains; I was certainly no crazier the day before my
wedding.

--Well! sir? said Madame Aubanel gaily, threatening her husband with
finger...

"I'll be mad for a long time yet, don't worry. But seriously, I
would like this marriage of Hector to succeed, we would found here a
colony of friends. Are there any chances, at least?...

--I have good reason to believe that Louise will not say no.

--That's already something.

--Unfortunately, I am at least as sure of strong resistance from
from Madame d'Ambleçay.

--Bast! when one feels loved one is very strong; I swear for my part that
if your parents had opposed our marriage...

--Hush!... Here he is.

Hector reappeared, graver than a deputy on the day of the Address vote,
all in black dressed like a notary or a butler. He was finishing
put on straw gloves.

"I am leaving for the Chateau d'Ambleçay," he said in a resolute tone.

His friends tried some of the fairest representations, but all
their efforts failed against his obstinacy.

"I want to be fixed," he answered; I feel in a vein of courage, I
take advantage, the die is cast. The car must be hitched, farewell;
wish me luck.

When Hector had left, Madame Aubanel begged her husband to run
after this imprudent man, who by an inconsiderate step went
certainly jeopardize everything.

"I certainly won't disturb myself," answered Ferdinand; do you believe,
dear friend, that he will go to the baroness? nay. The castle is near
an hour from now, he will have time to think things over, and we will
to see him come back all sheepish.




V


Once alone, by car, on the road to the castle of the baroness, Hector
indeed think.

What adventure was he on? wasn't that madness? Go like this, alone,
point blank, ask Madame d'Ambleçay for her daughter's hand,
it was marching in front of a refusal. Who forced him to risk like this,
on a single card, the happiness of his whole life? He could wait
increase the appreciation of Louise's mother, interest her friends in her
hit...

He says all this to himself. But he continued on his way nonetheless. This
was not that he dreaded Ferdinand's taunts, but he obeyed
to a secret voice, an inexplicable presentiment that advised him to
to pursue.

On the way he met a poor man, and emptied his purse into the hands of the
beggar, surprised at such generosity. If he had walked past
a church, he would have entered it to light a candle. The noise of
the car having scared magpies pecking in the middle of the
road, he noticed with satisfaction that there were three of them and that they
had taken their flight on the right. This omen is infallible.

In the courtyard of the chateau, a big mastiff, quite ugly and fairly
unclean came to him, sniffed him, and began to lick his hands. He the
patted gently. The caresses of this dog still seemed to him a
happy omen. Worry and expectation must have given birth
to superstition.

As he crossed the garden, he thought he saw behind the clumps
a leaky white dress. He recognized, or rather divined, Louise.

Finally, they ushered him into the living room, asking him to wait. We were
went to inform Madame d'Ambleçay. He thus had time to recover
little. He needed it. His gait at this moment appeared to him as
a flagrant act of insanity. For a bit he would have fled like a
thief, when the baroness entered.

She is a woman in her forties, but no one ever
would give that age. The peace and quiet of his life left him
this flower of youth that from the twentieth year women of
the city. We would never suspect his past sufferings, without his
white hair, which forms the sharpest contrast with his youthful face.
strange, and attest to the depth of his sorrows. Her voice is soft,
a little drawling, her gesture affable and dignified. His whole person is
imprinted with that supreme distinction that fortune will never give.

Her eyes, very beautiful, betrayed, on seeing Hector, a slight
surprise. But it was only a flash. She thought that no doubt he
left La Fresnaie and came to pay him a farewell visit. With a gesture
graceful, she indicated an armchair to her visitor, and sat down
herself on a loveseat.

Hector was very pale at that moment, like a man who has thrown himself
stuns him in great peril and finds he can no longer back down.
Her marriage at this hour could be just a question
of skill. He understood it, and managed to control his anguish a little.
'No twisted sentences,' he thought, straight to the point; I will explain myself
after." His voice was very shaky, but very distinct nonetheless.

"Madame," he said, "I could not see Mademoiselle your daughter without loving her.
If I had the good fortune to be judged by you worthy of her, I would not have
enough of my whole life to pay the debt of my gratitude.

Madame d'Ambleçay rose abruptly, putting her hand to her forehead.
A host of circumstances which had escaped him or had seemed to him
insignificant, suddenly appeared in his mind as a
light bleam. She accused herself of improvidence and blindness.

-- Imprudent! she murmured, taking her place, reckless...

"Pardon me, madam," continued Hector with a supplicating gesture,
forgive me the singularity, the very impropriety of my approach. I have
obeyed a feeling of which I am no longer the master. Usually, in the
world, a friend, a relative, undertake the request that I dared you
do it myself. But unfortunately! I no longer have parents, I am alone,
isolated. You hardly know me, I know, but a whole town, the
day when you will, will rise to bear witness to the honor of my
family. For me, lady, ask me, if you want, years
of trials...

The baroness's cold and stern gaze froze the words on the
Hector's lips; there was a moment of silence as awkward for
one than for the other.

"Believe it, sir," said Madame d'Ambleçay at last, still ill recovered from
his emotion and his surprise, believe that I consider myself very honored
of your approach. It would have been better, however, to make me sense it;
warned, I would have spared you the pain of a refusal, because it is
unable to accommodate your request...

--Oh! madam! exclaimed Hector painfully.

--Impossible! sir.

A muffled cry, which seemed to come from the next room, answered this
a word, pronounced in a firm tone which announced an unshakeable resolution.

"Listen..." said the baroness uneasily, imposing silence on Hector.

Almost immediately we heard the muffled sound of a body
collapsed on itself, and Madame d'Ambleçay rushed towards one of the
living room doors.

She pushed aside the tapestry, opened the door hastily, kissed
the apartment, and turning towards Hector who had followed her:

"Please wait for me," she said.

The door closed behind the baroness, and the young man was left alone.

Who had uttered this cry? Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay, of course. She
listening at the doors!...

In any other circumstance, Hector would have had a lot of fun with this
a situation that is both sad and comical, and of a distressing vulgarity.
But he had no heart for ridicule. Barely did he dare
rejoice at this formal confession wrested from the young girl. What would be
the influence of this involuntary confession on the decision of Madame
from Amblecay? That was the whole question for him.

Devoured by worries and anguish, not knowing whether he should fear or
hope again, he sank into an armchair, listening to
all the noises of the house. His fate was being decided at this moment. A word
was going to consummate his despair or bring him back to happiness.

He was so deep in his dark thoughts that he
did not hear the door open and did not notice the presence of
Louise's former tutor. He had to touch him
arm slightly.

Hector shuddered like a sleeper awakened by a bucket of cold water. Her
face expressed such naive bewilderment, he rolled his eyes so frightened,
that the abbot could not help smiling.

"Monsieur," said the priest, "Madame la baroness will no doubt soon be
come back, but she feared boredom for you, and sent me to hold you
company.

The young man bowed.

"This dear abbé," he thought, "is going, without suspecting it, to tell me everything
that is happening.

Crazy presumption! In vain Hector put himself to the expense of ruses and
diplomacy. To all his insidious or direct questions, the spiritual
priest found a way, while talking a lot, not to answer absolutely
nothing. So well, that after an hour and more of conversation, the sad
in love was no more advanced than before. He was strong
disconcerted, when to his great satisfaction the Baroness came to break the
face-to-face. The priest, almost immediately, slipped away discreetly.

Madame d'Ambleçay's countenance showed deep pain. He
was easy to see that she had wept; she still had some pain
to hold back her tears. Hector would have taken pity on the alteration of features
of the poor mother, if he himself had not suffered much. The pain is
selfish.

"First of all, sir," said the Baroness, with prayers in her voice,
swear to me, come what may, never to open your mouth on
what just happened.

"I swear it to you, madam.

Hector's inimitable sincerity must have reassured Madame
d'Amblecay. She thanked him with a look, but that look was worth
all the thanksgivings of the earth.

"Presently, sir," she resumed, "at your unexpected request,
I answered: impossible. So--she blushes as she pronounces these
words,--then I had not consulted my daughter. Now it's with
his assent that I come to tell you: I do not believe that it is
possible to ever grant you his hand.

Hector perfectly grasps the nuance of this second answer. However
it was like a second wound. This was not what he expected.
He fell roughly to the ground, with all the height of his hopes. The
Baroness continued:

--It has been a long time since my daughter's marriage
inexorably stopped. Baron d'Ambleçay, on his deathbed, designated
himself the husband he intended for his daughter. I swore to obey his
wishes; one does not betray an oath made at the bedside of a dying person. Should
my heart to break, were Louise's heart to be broken likewise, we
will keep a sacred promise. We are never completely unhappy
when one is conscious of having fulfilled one's duty.

"Is there no longer any hope, then?" murmured Hector overwhelmed.

--I will make you judge of it, sir, listen to me: At the Revolution, the
my husband's grandfather emigrated with all his family, his wife and his
five children. All his property was sequestrated, and he soon
to fall into deep distress. It was in London that he was
refugee. He and his family almost perished of misery, cold and
hungry, in this town where they didn't know anyone. To give a
little bread for his children, he placed himself as a laborer in a
rich manufacturer, and his wife, a Cinq-Cygne, made households in the
neighborhood. But what could their efforts!... The woman fell
dangerously ill. An inexorable owner went, for lack of
payment, throwing the whole unfortunate family into the street, that was it
made of them, when Providence, of which one must never despair,
sent them a saviour. A wealthy baronet took in the grandfather of
my husband and offered him, as well as all his family, the noblest of
hospitality. And this, not for a few days, for a few months, but
for years. The d'Ambleçays owe their salvation to this man
generous, to this friend of unhappy days. And later, when the
revolutionary storm was calmed, it was thanks to him that they were able
return to France and recover part of their property. Memory
of this benefit has been transmitted as a heritage in our family,
sir.

"I understand it," answered Hector weakly.

"Well, sir, we can pay off that debt today. HAS
in turn, the family of this noble Englishman experienced misfortune; his son has
been ruined. Several times my husband went to lay down his whole
our wealth; he never wanted to accept an obol from those who
owed more than his life to his father. He could have worked
to undertake something, to attempt to raise one's fortune; but you
know the deep, insurmountable horror of the English nobility for
everything related to trade. The baronet, shut up in the castle of
his fathers, refused all the proposals, preferring his mediocrity,
heroically supported, to all the enjoyments of acquired wealth
at the cost of what he called his honor. Finally he died,
bequeathing to his son only his poverty and a spotless name.

It is this son, sir, who must be Louise's husband.

--Ah! exclaimed Hector, carried away by his despair, the Englishman had
only share his fortune, and you, madam, you sacrifice your daughter.

"This union, sir," said the baroness severely, "was settled between
the father of this young man and my husband. We had no other way
to come to the aid of a cruelly tried family, too proud to
to accept the return of an alms.--For they have given alms to the
d'Amblecay. The young baronet has long been warned, he knows
our conventions, he knows that my daughter is destined for him, the time fixed
for this wedding is approaching, and finally, to tell you the truth...

Hector's livid pallor frightened the baroness; so she hesitated
minute after these last words.

She, however, steeled herself with courage, and turning her head away:

"We are expecting him," she said in a weak voice.

--You are cruel! madam, answered Hector bitterly, he does not
shouldn't go back on your refusal...

--I went back on my first words, because I was against
you before talking to Louise; now I am for you.
I would have done everything to hasten the conclusion of this marriage, now I
won't do anything...

"So what do you expect?...

"I hope in God, sir. My daughter's fiancé can forget his
promise, Louise may displease him... what do I know?...

Hector shook his head sadly.

-- If only we could help this oblivion. Ah! if I knew him,
I would tell him...

"You wouldn't say anything to him, sir. If only you spoke the name
of my daughter in front of him, then you would have less chance
than today.

--But I am rich. If half my fortune...

--If it was a question of money, it would already be solved.

--Oh! murmured Hector, "to stop marriages like that in advance!" fatal
imprudence. My father too, Madame, he resumed louder, had decided
that I would marry the daughter of one of his friends. He is waiting for me, this friend...

--That's another obstacle you didn't mention.

"If there were only this one!" he added thoughtlessly.

"I excuse you, sir," resumed Madame d'Ambleçay with dignity, "this
is not your reason that speaks. Know even that if the baronet came
to forget his father's word, I would not grant you the hand of
Louise before your fiancée's wedding..... But let me go
join my daughter, and rest on Providence. However, I will have
one more favor to ask of you...

Hector stopped Madame d'Ambleçay with a gesture.

"I understand you, madame," he said; this very evening I will have left the
Fresnaie.

And, taking leave of the baroness, he withdrew in despair, his head empty,
his heart swollen with sobs. He felt he was leaving his soul in this
small castle of Touraine.

As he slowly crossed the yard to get back to his car,
trying to guess which of all these windows was that of
Louise, he was joined by the abbot. He sadly greeted this priest whose
envied happiness.

Didn't he live almost the same life as Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay? he
saw her every day, he could talk to her at any time.

"Dear sir," said the old tutor to him, "pardon me for running
so after you, but didn't you tell me earlier that you were counting
leaving soon for Paris?

"I will be there tomorrow," replied Hector with a sigh.

--Faith! That turns out well. I would be very much obliged to you if you
agreed to charge you a small commission for me...

"I am at your service, sir...

--Oh! it's simply a letter to deliver from me to the fiancé of
Miss Louise, Sir James Wellesley, who lives at the moment
capital, rue de Rivoli, hotel des Etrangers.

Hector took the letter trembling with pleasure, and the abbe, who
confounded in thanks escorted him back to his car.

--What does this mean? thought Hector, when he found himself alone; madam
d'Ambleçay had not told me the name of this unfortunate Englishman;
would she take this roundabout way? Does she tacitly authorize me to
make every effort to bring about a rupture? No it is not
likely. Is it Louise who... Oh! no, no, impossible, the idea must
come from the abbé, I suspect he is very shrewd, with his good-natured air. the
sorrow of his pupil will have earned me his protection. He knows the proverb:
"Help yourself, heaven will help you," and he advises me, of course, to
lend a helping hand to Providence. He gives me the means. HAS
good hearer, hello! I will never speak of Madame d'Ambleçay to M.
Wellesley; but that I lose Louise's love if it ever comes
Touraine!

Hector found his friends at La Fresnaie very worried about his long
absence, and his upset face did not reassure them.

--You have failed? asked Madame Aubanel.

"Alas, yes!... I have very little hope left.

A strict observer of his speech, Hector did not speak of the scene of the
living room, but in a few words he summed up his conversation with the mother of
Louisa. When he came to the letter with which he had been entrusted by the abbot,
Madame Aubanel shared his opinion.

"It is a branch of salvation that he holds out to you," she said, "but be
circumspect. I have known the baroness since my childhood, never have I
view to reconsider a decision. Not a word from Louise to Sir James. If I
I'm surprised of one thing, it's that she didn't push you away
absolutely. There is a mystery for me underneath that I will penetrate. I
must admit that I knew the history of the Ambleçay family,
and the exchange of words...

"And I didn't know anything about it! exclaimed Ferdinand; my wife has
secrets is treason. But you, poor friend, what are you going to do?

--First, to leave this very evening; then, I will act according to the circumstances.
Yourself, in my place, what would you do?

"True, I know absolutely nothing about it. All I can say is
that if between Herminie and me I had seen a rival, a man, a
Mainly English...

--Well?

"I would have strangled him, clean, without remorse. Me, first, I can't
suffer the English.

--Alas! I had the weakness to love this people.

--What blindness!

--I am back from it. It doesn't matter, your way is violent.

"Above all," concluded Madame Aubanel, "the prudence, Monsieur Hector, of
prudence.

A few hours later, Ferdinand drove his friend to the station of
the nearest railway, still three leagues distant.

Hector was explaining to Ferdinand an ingenious and infallible combination
that he had just imagined.

"Do you see, dear friend, I am going to find this accursed Englishman, I
overwhelmed with kindness, I open my heart, my house, my
stock Exchange...

--That's kind of you.

--Is not it? So he is seduced. He is my friend, my inseparable,
we are one, he only sees through my eyes.

--So far, so good; and after?

"Afterward, friend Ferdinand, I inoculate this son of perfidious Albion with the
virus of all the vices of our gangrenous civilization. I wake up in
him all the passions that ruin the heart, the mind, the health and the
stock Exchange. I make him playful, drunk, libertine. I plunge it to the most
deep in the foul cesspool of debauchery. I want it, within a year, lost
of honor and debts, bald, and penniless...

"Shut up, Hector, passion makes you lose your moral sense.

--It's nothing yet. He is ruined, I come to his aid; I him
lends money, as much as he wants, more than he wants. I feed
his vices royally. I throw him a hundred, two hundred, five hundred
thousand francs, if necessary... It's the devil if Madame d'Ambleçay
accept such a son-in-law. I admit, however, that she resigns herself to
immolate his daughter to this scoundrel, then I use my rights. I took
my precautions, the Englishman signed bills of exchange for me, I
execute him, and I send him to rot in Clichy...

--Devil! said Ferdinand, you are an ingenious villain. My process was
brutal, yours is softer, but much more abominable.

--Do not worry! Dear friend; the day after my marriage to
Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay, I assure her a perpetual annuity of twenty
thousand pounds. As for the rest, too bad for him. What does he think of,
this schemer, to want to marry the woman I love?

The two friends had just entered the station.

Hector had taken his ticket and had his luggage checked in.
Ferdinand drew him into a corner.

"Listen," he said mysteriously, "he came to La Fresnaie this summer a
photographer...

--Oh that! what are you singing to me?

-- So be patient. He was not very skilful, this artist, however I
authorized him to do the portrait of my wife. Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay
took the opportunity to get his own. There remained a test
to my wife, I stole her for you, here she is...

--Oh! give, dear Ferdinand, give quickly, you are the best of friends.....
Do you need all my blood?

--Thanks for today. It is quite ugly, this portrait; but you know,
blondes come badly. Come, farewell! the train is going to leave, send me
your address, we will keep you informed...

Hector got into the carriage, blessing the Abbot from the bottom of his heart, Madame
Aubanel, Ferdinand, photography and photographers.

He was not alone in his compartment, which saddened him greatly.
But he took advantage of the sleep of the other travelers to leave more than a hundred
time from his pocket the portrait of Mademoiselle Louise and tell her the most
pretty things.




VII


In Paris, Hector was expected.

His letter to the Blandureau family gave three months of respite, they
were well employed. Everything was ready in time for the bridegroom's arrival.
The house stood under arms, like a regiment on the eve of
inspection. The servants made you want to see, under their liveries
new. The furniture in the living room had been renewed, from the rolls
from windows and doors, to the paintings of "great masters" that
the old trader is happy to buy--at reasonable prices, for
encourage the arts.

M. Blandureau was feverishly agitated, thinking of the arrival of
his future son-in-law. Preparations were complete, why
was he late? And he was counting the days. Madame Blandureau, too,
seemed tormented, more by curiosity, it is true, than by
worry.

Alone, Mademoiselle Aurélie did not seem in any way disturbed by
the approach of the great event. Her anxieties, if she had any,
hardly betrayed. She waited, with the most peaceful impatience
and the quietest, as befits a former student of the
Sacred Heart.

Everyone has known, knows or will know the Blandureau family.

It is the very clear and very distinct proof, although after the letter,
of a realistic painting: interior of a retired trader with a huge
fortune. This table will be true, apart from a few details, as long as the
trade will make traders rich, that is to say for a long time to come.

The people who practiced Mr. Blandureau, commissionaire for the
United States--an industry that has lost a great deal--says that in
business he was a round man. He is still physically. His
majestic belly seems to call for a scarf; he has too many legs
short, and his arms are not long enough. His head small, a little
bare, does not lack finesse. He has moving eyes that say
well his character, he could not sit still for an hour.

M. Blandureau would be the best of men if he could forget his
great fortune. He forgets her sometimes, so he's charming. You
speak, he listens to you with an affable air, his answers are simple and
benevolent.

But if suddenly his millions come to his mind, good evening!
the polite man disappears; you have only one sullen interlocutor,
brusque, impertinent. He slices off the big trader, cuts the
conversation, and, in a tone that admits of no argument, affirms the
bigger nonsense. It is then the most detestable and the most
knocking out upstarts.

Mr. Blandureau is bored, that is his misfortune. He wanted a big
fortune he has. His wishes are fulfilled, his goal is achieved, his life
no longer has any reason to exist. He curses, I am sure, the vanity that
caused him to withdraw from the trade. Every thirty-one of the month, he has
tensions at the thought that he has no deadline "to do." For him the
days are endless, although he uses to kill everyone's time
possible expedients: the newspapers are his greatest distraction,
and he might join the opposition, if he was convinced that
those dreadful liberals have no grudge against his properties.

All those around him often have to suffer from his abrupt
mood changes. We forgive him, because we know he is very good at
reality. We are not unaware that this little tyrant is also heavily
oppressed. He is indeed the most slave of despots. Her daughter,
the imperious Aurélie dominates and crushes him with her superiority. Of his
life, he could not resist this child, the object of a cult that is not
free from fear. At the breath of his inspirations, he obeys faster
than the weather vane to the four winds of the sky. He is sometimes ashamed of his
weakness, and he avenges himself on his wife.

Also Madame Blandureau is like an island between her husband whom she
feared and revered,--he made a fortune,--and her daughter whom she admires and
feared for his haughty wit and manners.

A passport clerk would draw the portrait of Mrs.
Blandureau: medium forehead, medium eyes, medium height, everything about her is
average, except the spirit. His greatest intellectual enjoyment is
the absorption of a drama by M. d'Ennery, and she contributed, by her
presence, to the well-deserved success of the _Pied de Mouton_.

This poor woman rejoices to be rich, and yet her fortune is
his greatest misfortune.

She has thirty-six dresses, each one more magnificent than the other.
others, but she is uncomfortable in them. She would like a bet
simple, her husband demands a millionaire toilet from her. She would like to
walking, her husband only wants to let her go out in the car,
with a valet on the seat, beside the coachman. Finally, last torture,
she is obliged to command servants whose mien
impertinent and the beautiful dress intimidate her and impose on her enormously.

Mademoiselle Blandureau takes nothing from her mother. absolute sovereign
of the house, she reigns unchecked; before his will, all
wills bend. The vain bourgeois like to give themselves masters
in their children.

To see Mademoiselle Aurélie, we guess her character. haughty,
capricious, it is and can only be sensitive to pleasures
idiots of vanity. She goes through life playing the jobs of
queen.

She is a tall young girl with a superb gait, very dark,
hard look. His black eyes have the coldness and flash of steel. Never
there was not detected a glimmer of sensitivity, nor any tears other than
angry tears. His dry, curt voice is even more imperious than
her stare.

Maybe she loves her parents. If she treats her mother badly enough,
close as a first maid, she knows her father's goodwill
to have amassed a great fortune. It is true that she does not forgive him
not to be called Blandureau.

This ridiculous, trivial, common name,--to speak like her,--has poisoned
his youth and still causes his despair.

His horror for this name dates from the convent.

Placed in a house peopled with the daughters of the old aristocracy,
she made the immense mistake of wanting to humiliate less wealthy companions.

We took revenge. Her young friends proved to her that a young lady whose
father is called Blandureau can claim nothing, if not to restore the
coat of arms of some ruined gentleman, and that he is not in this world
only one social advantage really worthy of envy: having had a grandfather in the
crusades.

The taunts of her companions exasperated Aurélie. She answered it
by a quite ridiculous display; the epigrams redoubled, they
had given him a nickname, he was only called _Blandurette_. say what
that she suffered is impossible.

Finally as, one day out, his father, on his express orders, had
sent to fetch in a veritable gala carriage, her enemies,
during recess, improvised a long lament to the tune of
Cadet Roussel.

This lament began thus:

Blandurette looks lordly
Of a servant in carnival;
To display her grand toilette,
His dad gives him a wheelbarrow.
Ah! ha!
Yes really,
Blandurette is a good child!

The other fifty verses were neither meaner nor more
witty, but they almost caused Mademoiselle to die of spite.
Aurélie: she had a nervous attack, and the next day left her
convent never to set foot there again.

She had masters at home.

But this nickname of Blandurette remained in her life like a memory
bitter. She has not seen any of her convent companions again, and if she
meets someone, she glares at him.

If Mademoiselle Aurélie sometimes thought of marriage, it was with
the hope of leaving this fatal name. It will be the most beautiful day of his
life.

Hector was not noble, it is true, but had a sonorous name,
Malestrat. She hoped to convince her husband to put in front of a
particle, to take a title even, which is not very difficult,
they say, with money.

The entire Blandureau family then lived in their country house in
Ville-d'Avray, although it was the beginning of winter. It's good
tone of staying moping in the countryside until the early days
of January; the noble families of the Faubourg Saint-Germain do not disdain
not this economy.

The house of Ville-d'Avray is the work of M. Blandureau's troubles.

He devoted three years and nearly five hundred thousand francs to it; he calls
this house its candy box.

It is indeed something in the taste of the mounted parts that the
restaurateurs serve wedding and body meals. All orders
of architecture mingle and merge in the most abominable
hustle and bustle. There are towers and warheads, pepper shakers with a
Italian peristyle; medieval gables with Greek columns and
flamboyant turrets, finally a veranda such as the
southern planters to their homes.

There are three or four architects in Paris who have won a hundred thousand
francs of rent to embellish with these horrible things the countryside
Parisian, once so beautiful.

La _Folie-Blandureau_ is what the neighbors call it for
flatter the ex-trader, is built half stone and half brick of
all the colours. There are paintings outside and
marble and porcelain inlays. Looks like something
Chinese, a pagoda if you will, and the traveler stops
involuntarily to see the hoard come out.

All around the house, there is a large, well-wooded park. Mr.
Blandureau wanted to throw down the trees, and replace them with varnishes
from Japan; Mademoiselle Aurélie stopped him. His activity then
folded back on the garden, which he wanted to make a small Bois de Boulogne
in miniature: there are rocks, a cave and two bridges, a pond and
a river; there is also a waterfall. An old horse pulls by the day
the river of a well: the waterfall dries up when the horse takes his meals.

It was at Ville-d'Avray that Hector fell the day after his departure from the
Fresnaie, at four o'clock in the evening. Mr. Blandureau, who remembered
having seen him when he was only ten years old, recognized him when he
appointed.

He pressed him to his heart, calling him his son, and pushed
loud cries to attract the whole house, he even broke a doorbell.

Madame Blandureau ran up at the noise and her husband introduced her to their
son-in-law.

--But where is Aurélie? he asked; in the garden no doubt?

They looked for Mademoiselle Aurélie; we couldn't find her.

The arrival of her future husband having been announced to her, she had run
rushed to his room.

As she only freshened up, after less than two
hours she reappeared. She advanced majestically, announced from afar by
the frills of her silk dress which swept the carpets half a meter away
behind her.

It looked like the statue of Dignity lowered from its pedestal.

--Come on then! cried M. Blandureau to him.

And the worthy man, taking his daughter's hand, put it in Hector's.

"Come, embrace one another, my children," said the father.

The two children did not kiss.

Mademoiselle Aurélie stepped back drawing such a cold bow
than correct.

Hector bowed deeply.

The young girl had just decided that her husband would never be anything for
she.

Hector said to himself, smiling graciously:

--Good Lord! how I dislike this big girl! I will not have
decided in advance to break off my marriage, which I would certainly take
resolution today.

From that moment Hector studied the character of Mademoiselle Aurélie, he
hoped to come very quickly to displease him and to be given
leave.

The misfortune is that M. Blandureau was delighted with him; he found her
the good-natured air, and the retired merchant adores good children.

But it is precisely this air that Mademoiselle cannot bear
Aurelie. Hector has the manners of a decent man, that is to say
that it is simple. Mademoiselle Aurélie, whose taste is not strong
exercised, confuses this simplicity with common manners. the supreme
distinction for her is the garment that catches the eye, the gait
emphatic, the solemn face, finally this self-confidence which gives
to the simpletons the unbearable paces they drag about in the world.

Hector, after an hour, knew thoroughly the character of his betrothed.
So at table he had the playful humor and the easy spirit of a
travel agent. Without worrying about miss's pursed lips
Aurélie, he called Mr. Blandureau "father-in-law," and Mrs. Blandureau
"step mother."

All through dinner he talked business, bristling his conversation
of numbers. It is true that he knows nothing of commerce: no matter; he
spoke of speculations, rises, falls, freights, ships in
charge.

He had, he would say, a most fortunate idea, an enterprise
considerable that he wanted to start immediately after his marriage. He
was to carry out a roundup of raw hides on the markets of
Mexico; he then intended to bring about a scarcity, to lay down the law to the
French tannery, maintain prices, and thus make profits
considerable.

Mademoiselle Aurélie turned pale at these speeches.

It was quite another thing, really, for dessert. Hector softened, spoke
of the future, and speaks his dreams aloud. He hoped, once married,
finally find happiness and tranquility; his wife would be his
cashier; she would keep the books and take care of the
correspondence.

"Think about it, mademoiselle," he said, then addressing Aurélie directly,
to the magnificent businesses that we can undertake and to the profits
immense that we will realize, because finally our house will have almost
more costs.

The girl did not answer. In herself she promised herself to
greatly disconcert the plans of her future husband.

Hector overdid his role a little, it was not a misfortune. At the end he
had almost succeeded in displeasing M. Blandureau.

However, as it was getting late, the trader did not want to let
Hector to return to Paris. He offered her a room, but at a sign from
his daughter, he quickly stopped insisting.

"Perhaps you are right to refuse," he said to the young man, "our
house in this season is almost uninhabitable.

Mr. Blandureau is very honest, his house is completely uninhabitable.
season.

Hector's last word on retiring was whispered in the ear of M.
Blandureau.

--Well! he asked her, when is the wedding?

--Oh! answered this one, we will talk about it again, we have time, nothing
don't press.

Hector went away very happy.
Is made. To the English, now, on to the English!




VII


The next day, at nine o'clock in the morning, Hector in a black coat, despite
hour, entered the Hotel des Etrangers.

--Sir James Wellesley? he asked a valet.

"I am going to have the honor of conducting monsieur," replied the servant.

Hector was ushered into a small salon where he was asked to wait.

It was on the fourth floor, a very small room, furnished with this furniture
particular to hotels, which are no doubt made expressly for them, because
the like is not found anywhere else.

In the middle, on a large table, was a bristling plan of Paris
of pins.

On the fireplace, you could see all the books published on Paris in
the intention of our neighbors across the Channel: the _Promeneur à Paris_, the
_Guide des Musées_, the _Art of knowing Paris in three days_, _the
Traveller's illustrated Guide in Paris_ and _the Murray's Guide_. There's
also had all kinds of phrasebooks and two or three
_pocket_ dictionaries.

Hector waited little more than five minutes. The door opened and sir
James appeared.

He is a man of about thirty, the most
striking classic English. He doesn't have very blond hair,
but his beard is of the most beautiful red. He has a clear and fresh complexion like
that of a high school student. Her eyes of a beautiful faience blue do not have the
less expression; he is tall and stiff, seems embarrassed at the joints
and is set in the latest Regent's street fashion, which expressly draws
her fashions from the rue Vivienne. Sir James is the _cant_ made man; never
baronet more dignified, colder, more polite, more reserved, more prudish
brought British pride to France. Once in his life
he was not perfectly suitable and even was completely
_improper_ is coming from Dover to Calais on the steam-boat: he does not
was not the master of the impressions of his stomach and, _for shame!_ a
old lady, placed near him, exclaimed: _Shocking!_

Sir James barely speaks French; so he moved his tongue in his
mouth, searching for a word, when Hector spoke:

"I have the honor to speak to Mr. Wellesley?" he asked.

"Yes," replied the baronet.

Hector then took the abbé's missive from his pocket, and handed it to
his rival:

"Here, sir, is a letter which I am instructed to deliver to you.

"Do you allow me, sir?" asked Sir James, breaking the seal.

The abbe had taken care to write in English. Also Mr. Wellesley browsed
the letter in seconds.

The old priest no doubt spoke favorably of Hector, for the
Sir James's manners suddenly changed completely. as much as he
had been cold, the more polite and even affectionate he became. He invited his
visitor to sit down, which he had not done for a man who did not
had not been presented.

After an hour of fairly laborious conversation given the difficulty of
mimicry, the two young people were at best together.

Sir James told his new friend that he was on his way to
marry in Touraine. If he had stopped in Paris, it was because he wanted to
improve in the French language and speak intelligibly before
to appear before the one he was to marry.

Hector thought his stay in the capital would last a long time.

The Englishman then confessed the deep boredom he felt in Paris; there
knew no one and lived alone. It always seemed to him that the
people he spoke to laughed at him. If he entered
in a store, the merchants stole it; at the theater he did not understand
absolutely nothing; even at the Opera ballet he found the pirouettes of
Mademoiselle Emma Livry written too much in French. In short, he was all
done sorry, _very disappointed_, as he says with a sigh.

But the baronet's face brightened when Hector told him that he
was planning to stay a few weeks in Paris and that he was getting into his
disposal, either to take it for a walk, or to present it in a few
families where he was admitted.

Sir James, in a tender tone, swore eternal friendship to him whom he
called his saviour.

"Yes, we shall be friends," said Hector to himself; your naivety makes my plan more
easy, and I won't leave you until you've become the most
spouses cannot.

So, to strengthen this hour-long friendship, Aurélie's fiancé
proposed to the Englishman to introduce him that very evening to M. Blandureau.

Hector, who knew the aristocratic susceptibility of a baronet
tory, was careful not to tell him that this Blandureau was a merchant
took of.




VIII


Trade, we are assured, is not made precisely for
develop the qualities of heart and mind. It's up to trade
while M. Blandureau owes a rare and precious virtue, which dominates
its character and gives it a certain originality, by the time which
short.

This vain man is fond of what he calls "probity
commercial."

This fanaticism dates from his beginnings in business, when he signed
many notes which he paid exactly when due.

He could, without being agitated by vain scruples, stop there. The code
particular in the industry has margins wide enough for everyone there
make yourself comfortable.

We buy, we pay, we pay, and we are considered. The surplus does not look
nobody.

But M. Blandureau did not want to remain a vulgar merchant. Her
signature was current as a banknote, he resolved to give
his word the value of his signature. From then on, he compelled himself to hold
his verbal promises no less scrupulously than his promises
signed. He highly treated as rascals those who did not believe themselves
engaged as long as nothing is written.

When we were transacting business with him, if he said, "It's agreed,"
we could sleep peacefully, as peacefully as after a contract
drafted by two notaries.

On several occasions he thus engaged in operations
disadvantageous, without being otherwise bound than by a verbal promise;
he could withdraw, he did not want to, and suffered the losses without
complain. If he had been poor, embarrassed, perhaps we would have found him a
uncomplicated; he was rich, people admired him.

On these sorts of occasions, he displayed a certain heroism,
he would never have accepted the remittance of a penny. Also, on the squares of
New York, London and Paris, they said:

--Blandureau's word is worth gold.

This commercial proverb deliciously caressed the self-esteem of the
trader and exalted his pride. It was his happiness, his glory. We see
on the panels of superb carriages, around old coats of arms,
currencies that are not worth that one.

"The Bank," M. Blandureau would often say, boasting, "the Bank
of France, which requires three signatures on the bills it expects,
would not hesitate to make advances on my mere word.

Maybe that was going a bit far. But you have to respect flaws
that produce such qualities. So many people will never have the
qualities from their faults!

Vanity obliges. M. Blandureau understood this, and at the end of his career
commercial, he would have without balance sacrificed his fortune and suspended his
payments on a due day, rather than "letting his word in
suffering," following his picturesque expression.

Now that he is retired from business, he applies his principles to
private life; they are the rule of his conduct, the guide of his actions
the most indifferent, finally his commercial probity has degenerated into
monomania.

Don't you dare miss an appointment you gave him,
you would singularly lower in his esteem, he would accuse you of
to have neither honor nor delicacy.

On the other hand, you can absolutely count on him when, for the
least thing, about anything, he will have given you this
famous saying that is current at the Bank.

You invited him to dinner, he promised to come, be sure
that he will come. He will come whether it rains, snows or thunders; he
will come sick, he would have come dying. And it will honor your
dinner, and he will eat, he will drink, he will be a good
die of indigestion.

It is therefore extremely difficult to extract a promise from him.
formal. He is still hesitating, saying neither yes nor no. He fears to
engage, never knowing where it may lead.

With such a character, M. Blandureau must not have dreamed of breaking a
marriage arranged long ago between him and M. Malestrat the father; he had none
even the idea. Hector had had the good fortune to displease him, but he
would have displeased a thousand times more that nothing had been changed at
conventions he considered sacred.

Hector had been cruelly mistaken when he believed his business in
good path on this side. If on the first evening Mr. Blandureau had answered
evasively when his future son-in-law had asked him:--"When will the
wedding?" it was because he had not had the leisure to reflect. He had
experienced a cruel disappointment and had not been master of his spite and
of his bad mood. He had obeyed this first movement, of which it is necessary
always challenge yourself.

Hector was not far away, when the former merchant was already reproaching himself with
bitterness an answer that could arouse certain doubts in the mind
of the young man, and give him to think that we wanted to temporize for
then politely dismiss him under any pretext.

Certainly, if it hadn't been so late, Mr. Blandureau would have
ran after his son-in-law; but he didn't even know his address at
Paris. He returned to his apartment, promising himself to
an apology the next day.

"I don't like this marriage very much," he said to himself, "so I must
hasten to conclude it, my honor is interested in it.

This is more or less what he replied to his daughter, when Mademoiselle
Aurélie told him very categorically that she would never like the
chosen husband.

"I can do nothing about it, my poor child," he said to her; we are
engaged in an unfortunate speculation, we must suffer the
consequences. It is especially when the sequels must be
disastrous that one has merit in not failing in one's promises; we don't
will not fail ours; Blandureau's word is worth gold.

And as the girl made a rather meaningful pout:

"Listen," continued the former merchant, "we mustn't be too distressed.
What did I promise M. Malestrat? to give him your hand. So you
will marry her. But I didn't guarantee her that you would love her, hard
fortunately. So when you're married, if you don't come back to
his account, well! you will plead in separation, or even you
leave amicably, if he wants to consent.

This rather new way of looking at marriage made Mademoiselle smile.
Aurélie, and she did not insist further. She knew that everything
that she could tell her father would be perfectly useless, she was
in advance resigned to marry Hector. Deep down, she felt one
rather mediocre grief, no one, so far, having succeeded in touching
her heart.--"As much that one as any other," thought she. And already she
fixed in his mind a very skilful plan, which, the day after the
marriage, was to assure him forever an indisputable supremacy
in the household.

We did not ask Madame Blandureau's opinion, because usually
this excellent lady never has an opinion. She had one, though.
in this circumstance: she had found her son-in-law most amiable and
the most seductive of betrothed.--"Excellent young man," she thought, "you
won't have, thank God! time to study my daughter's character; you
will marry her in the fortnight, and thus you will have ensured peace
from my old days. Be blessed a thousand times!"

Such was the moral situation of the Blandureau family, when, the
day after his arrival, Hector took it into his head to present at Ville-d'Avray
his new friend Mr. James Wellesley.

It was the debut of the young baronet in that French society which,
even today, in London as in almost all
capitals of Europe, for the most witty, the most mocking, the
more ruthless than he is in the world. Which proves that fame
is better than golden belt, and that one can live a very long time on
a well-established reputation.

Sir James had spent part of the day preparing for this
solemn and decisive presentation. As above all and above all he
fears ridicule, he had exaggerated all his ridiculousness. He was more
cold, graver, more starchy than ever; so stiff, that he could
hardly make a move. He walked all in one piece, and if he
bowed, his body formed a right and sharp angle like a knife
that we close.

His countenance clearly expressed that deep disdain for the whole world, which is
one of the prerogatives of the citizen of Great Britain. Finally, although
deeply disturbed at the bottom of appearing at the court of the French ladies, it
had that imperturbable assurance, that self-confidence, of a man
knowing its value, and sure that if one dared to pluck a hair from its
head, Lord Palmerston would not hesitate to arm a hundred ships
and spend a million pounds to get redress and do
restore the hair.

When he had offered his services to the young Englishman, to introduce him
in the Parisian world, Hector had only one goal: to pose the first
milestones of a friendship which, in his mind, was to be disastrous to a rival
hated. Certainly, he did not believe him destined for the slightest success.

How wrong he was!

Mr. Wellesley appeared to the fascinated Blandureau family, as
the living and admirable incarnation of the great traditions of
nobility. Madame Blandureau admitted later that, that day, she
had thought he saw an emperor, at the very least, enter his drawing-room.

Hector suddenly found himself relegated to the background; even better, he was
eclipsed, so that no one seemed to notice his presence. the
son-in-law was forgotten for the newcomer.

In his life, the vain merchant had done so graciously, with
so much affability, the honors of his house.

For his new host, he showed delicate attentions, almost
respectful. But on learning that Sir James is to inherit the
peerage, of one of his uncles who sits in the House of Lords, he became
quite obsequious.

From that moment he no longer called Mr. Wellesley anything but mylord. He put to
to pronounce this so magnificent title with a naive and proud emphasis: it
had, as they say, his mouth full.

It was enough to no longer recognize Monsieur Blandureau who does so
readily profession of opinions as liberal as they are egalitarian. Him
who, whenever the occasion arises, clearly states his opinion
about priests and nobles, he did not feel comfortable having at his
table an authentic representative of this English aristocracy, the
proudest and most susceptible of the earth.

If he remembered Hector, it was to congratulate him on his beautiful
relations, and thank him for having thought of introducing him to this noble
foreign.

Mademoiselle Aurélie was, if possible, more delighted than her father,
and she knew no better than to conceal her impressions.

Beneath Mr. Wellesley's gaze, that gaze which expressed absolutely
nothing but self-satisfaction, she blushed like a boarder.
For the first time in her life she was embarrassed and doubted
of herself. Finally, strangely enough, she thought she felt something like
a slight heartbeat.

But also, could one dream of a more suitably formal gentleman,
more perfectly cold, more nobly dignified? Wasn't he really
the ideal of official etiquette and solemnity?

Every young girl, whether she admits it or not, caresses deep in her
heart an unlikely hero she never meets in life
real; happier, Mademoiselle Blandureau had just found her
hero.

A sudden metamorphosis took place within her.

The boldness of his gaze faded, his voice became less imperious,
his gesture, his posture became modest.

She seemed to forget her superb role as queen, and became again a young
daughter.

Finally, she had for her mother attentions and consideration which
amazed her. Madame Blandureau did not understand this
change, and his astonished gaze seemed to question all the
people present, and ask them the cause of such affability.

The superb Aurélie had just found her master.

Sir James, for his part, was not long in realizing that he was
friendly to all. There are those imperceptible nuances that cannot
imitate the most refined politeness, and which quickly give the man
of the world the measure of the welcome given to it.

The baronet felt more at ease; his timidity was reassured. Came to
strangers, he found himself after less than an hour in a house
friend. So he forgot his arrogance a little, undid the mask of his coldness
and ceased to stand on the alert with suspicious caution.

When accompanying Hector, Mr. Wellesley had sworn to himself not to open
the mouth. He was not mistaken about his ability to speak our language,
and didn't want to be laughed at.

Certain that he would not be laughed at, he dared to speak and spoke
a lot. We hardly understood him, to tell the truth, but the attention we
lent him was all the greater.

This first evening completed the loss of Hector in the spirit of
Miss Aurelie.

While listening distractedly to Mr. Wellesley's speeches
explained to M. Blandureau the difference between a Whig and a
tory, difference that the trader has never fully understood, she
involuntarily compared the two young people, and certainly the
comparison was not to Hector's advantage.

How common and trivial it seemed to him!

He was gay, witty and mocking, he had in speaking the animated gesture
men from the South; he laughed, and, more seriously, the others laughed
listening to it.

What a difference between these two men, between the air full of bonhomie
of one and the icy face of the other, between the clear gaze and a
little mocking Hector and the dull look of Sir James!

As one recognized well, at first sight, the nephew of the pair
of England and the son of the merchant of Bordeaux! Because finally, Mr.
Malestrat was a merchant.

Mademoiselle Aurélie had become deeply sad, by doing
all these thoughts.

"And yet," she said to herself, "this man whom I hate, I must
marry him!...

At this idea, she was very close to crying, and for the first time
again, she accused her father of imprudence, who had chosen a husband for her
without consulting her. Never had she been so genuinely unhappy.

Sir James did not seem to notice that the hours were passing, and
it was only at midnight that he spoke of retiring.

While escorting his guests to the courtyard, Mr. Blandureau
made 'My Lord' Wellesley swear to come back often, most often
possible.

"I promise you," replied the baronet.

And when he found himself alone with Hector:

"I can't express," he told her, "the deep impression I have
of this young girl; I find her, in truth, quite charming and
adorable.

Hector opened his mouth to answer:

--Mademoiselle Aurélie is my fiancee.

A secret presentiment stopped him.




IX


The day when Hector had imagined the abominable plan which was to lead to
the abyss the happy man designated by Baron d'Ambleçay, he had not
reckoned with his conscience. He had only listened to despair,
advise foolish resolutions.

With composure and reflection, the feeling of honor him
returned, and he understood all the odiousness of his project. He was horrified
to have been able to stop there for only a minute, and he gave it up. However,
short of a miracle, he saw no possible salvation. That
could he do? Wait. He waited with the deadly anguish of
unfortunate who knows an inevitable condemnation hanging over his head.

If he was still going back to Mr. Blandureau, it was because he was reluctant to break up
the first; he was also convinced that one day or another we
would very politely say goodbye to him. He certainly had no
eagerness of a young man officially admitted to court, to
hardly seemed like once or twice a week.

But he could stay in Paris. The house of Ville-d'Avray had conquered
an assiduous host, a host who fulfilled with marvelous accuracy
the duties neglected by Hector.

Sir James is a man who, too, knows how to keep his word. He
had promised M. Blandureau to come back sometimes, he came back every
days.

Yes, every day, this baronet, as audacious as it is exemplary,
faced three and four hours of conversation with the former
merchant, delighted to be listened to so attentively by a man whose
the uncle sits in the Upper House. He was the most listener
benevolent and the most resigned he had ever met.

It is true that most often the future lord answered in such a way as to
conclusively prove that he had heard or understood nothing, but
M. Blandureau did not stop for so little. He attributed the inconsistency
of his interlocutor to the difficulty he must have had in expressing himself
in French, and only went on with more success.

The fact is that, while appearing to lend a patient ear to
speech of the father, the baronet had eyes and attention only for the
daughter.

Struck to the heart the first night, Sir James the next day adored
Miss Aurelie. After eight days he was madly in love,
in love to the point of losing food and drink, but not enough
mad, unfortunately, to lose his memory.

The unfortunate suffered all the torments that Hector had endured,
when, near Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay, he forgot the daughter of M.
Blandureau.

He was, however, much more excusable. Struck like lightning, he
didn't have a minute for reflection. He no longer belonged
already, when the memory of Louise came back to him. And yet the voice
pitiless of his conscience cried out to him:

"Unworthy gentleman, you are forfeiting honor!"

But what is duty when passion commands! and already Sir James in
had come to admit to himself that, for him, getting away from Aurélie would be
to die.

He had many other tortures still.

He was poor, and he knew Mademoiselle Blandureau's father
prodigiously rich. This fortune was an insurmountable obstacle
in the eyes of the English gentleman. He who had barely enough to live on, he
professed a sovereign contempt for money. But who would want to believe
his disinterestedness?

Can an heiress in our century believe in selflessness
of a poor man?

If he asked M. Blandureau for his daughter's hand, he would not
would he not see the step of a ruined gentleman who speculates on his name
to make repairs to the paternal mansion?

But these sad reflections flew away at a single glance from
Mademoiselle Aurélie, and more than once the eyes of the young girl
met those of the baronetcy.

Sir James is a shy man despite his haughty ways. He is
modest too; for a long time he refused to believe in appearances that were too
flattering. He had noticed that the young girl was not fleeing her
presence. Was he coming, if she wasn't in the living room, she wasn't long
to go down there. More than once, while walking away, he had believed
see her lifting a corner of one of the muslin curtains in the
window, and accompanying him with his gaze to his car.

He attributed it all to chance; he only wanted to see actions
indifferent, until one day finally this chance that he gratified so
voluntarily of his successes provides him with the opportunity to find himself alone
with Miss Aurélie.

Oh! it was only a moment, hardly five minutes, but many people say
things in five minutes, especially when you're not talking, because they don't
did not speak. They remained standing, one in front of the other, moved,
trembling, eye to eye.

My faith! Sir James was no longer possessed, the magnetism of love
upset all his innate ideas of respect for propriety; he
found guilty of a boldness that he cannot yet explain
today, he dared to take Mademoiselle Aurélie's hand and carry it
respectfully to his lips.

Mademoiselle Aurélie did not withdraw her hand; he even thought he felt a
slight pressure of his fingers, mute response to his mute declaration.

No doubt Sir James was about to stutter a few sentences at last, when Mr.
Blandureau entered. The trader noticed neither his daughter's flush nor
the embarrassed look of the baronet. He held a newspaper in his hand and came
ask "my lord" for an explanation of the conduct of the English cabinet
in the affair of the _San Jacinto_.

Sir James succeeded, after incredible efforts, in mastering his
emotion. What would he not have given to drive Blandureau away? He was loved,
it was henceforth a certainty for him; he would have liked to be able to savor
his happiness; but no, he had to answer the old man's questions
merchant, who kept repeating to him:

--What do you think of the kidnapping of the Southern Commissioners?

The unfortunate baronet thought nothing at all, except that Mademoiselle
Aurélie is the most beautiful of women. He retreated into generalities.
and took no less than a good quarter of an hour to amplify this axiom of
British policy: "The principles of morality are eternal, but the
cotton is essential.

This day, so happily begun for Sir James, was to end
very sadly, alas!

In the morning he had received Mademoiselle's tacit confession of love.
Blandureau; that same evening he learned that she was Hector's fiancée and
that within a month she would be his wife.

It was the former trader himself who revealed this disastrous news to him.
Mr. Wellesley paled and staggered from the blow.

--Is it possible? he stammered, is it possible?

His confusion was too visible this time. Mr. Blandureau was obliged to
to notice.

"What is the matter, my lord?" he asked.

--Oh! said the baronet, I suffer, I suffer a great deal!

And, taking his leave, he withdrew without noticing that Mademoiselle
Aurélie visibly shared his emotion.

Sir James returned home in a state impossible to describe. The man
cold no longer existed. He was talking loudly in his room, he was gesticulating.

"I am definitely cursed," he said, "and now completely lost.
I broke my word as a gentleman, I forgot Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay,
I cheated on my bride, and now I'm taking the heart out of
the fiancée of the only friend I have in France. I will be a traitor to her
eyes, an utterly vile and contemptible man.

He first had the idea of writing to Hector; he wanted to confess his fault
involuntary; but he reflected and tore up the letter.

Then, a sudden inspiration lighting up her face:

"Yes," said he, "that is all I have to do; my resolution is taken.

And the next day he returned to M. Blandureau, as if nothing had happened.
past.

His existence was awful. In the presence of Mademoiselle Aurélie, he
was in seventh heaven; found himself alone, he fell without
transition to the depths of hell.




X


However, M. Blandureau was beginning to notice what was going on.
He wasn't positively sure, but he had what justice
calls for serious presumptions.

He was as unhappy as possible. It had been done so far
honor to himself of the daily visits of Sir James. Discovering
that he could also come for his daughter, his pride was
wounded to the quick.

It is not that a marriage with the nephew of a peer of England would have
infinitely flattered; he would have given to realize this beautiful dream half of
his fortune. But he was engaged with Hector; so he thought only of
to urge the decided union and to warn his future son-in-law of his suspicions.

Hector, too, was suspicious.

One day when he came to M. Blandureau's where he was getting more and more
rarer, he had seen on a table an English grammar and a
_pocket-dictionary_.

It was like a ray of light, and it is the heart swollen with joy and
of hope that he opened these two volumes. The pages were cut off,
and a few pencil signs along the margins attested that we are not
was served.

--Oh! thought Hector, Mademoiselle Aurélie is too sensible to want
learn english without a teacher. My friend James, I imagine, will be the
teacher. May she soon speak like a damsel of the
Lancashire!

And he walked away happier than he had been for a long time.

"Let's not trouble these young people," he said to himself; if Mr. Blandureau wants
see me, he will come and get me.

M. Blandureau, indeed, after having vainly waited for his son-in-law,
went to surprise him one morning.

The former trader seemed greatly moved.

--Do you love my daughter? he asked her first.

"Certainly," replied Hector, like a sister.

"Well," continued M. Blandureau, "I must reveal to you a very
severe. Your friend mylord Wellesley loves Aurélie.

Hector had all the difficulty in the world to suppress his joy.

--Are you quite sure of what you are saying? he asked.

--Roughly. I therefore believe that it would be good to press the matter, and to
get married as soon as possible.

"Very well," said Hector, "thank you; I will advise.

And as M. Blandureau kept coming back to his idea, he played the
scene from Mr. Sunday. Mr. Blandureau left his son-in-law, quite surprised to
his reluctance.

A greater surprise awaited him at home. His daughter had done it
ask.

Mademoiselle Aurélie truly loved Sir James, and she was well
determined to break with Hector at all costs.

She found innumerable advantages in this rupture. First she
became the wife of a titled man; she was called mylady. Like her
had enough fortune for two, she cared little about fortune.
She would go and live in England, where no one would dream of reproaching her
his plebeian origin. Finally the best reason, she loved sir
James.

So it was in the most resolute tone that she declared to her father that ever
she wouldn't marry Hector.

It would be difficult to imagine the anger and astonishment of
the former merchant at the announcement of this resolution of Aurélie.

--Do you really think about what you say? he stammered, you, my daughter, when
you know I gave my word!

"You will take it back, my father.

"Never!" cried the merchant, "never! Word of Blandureau is worth
gold.

"So be it," replied Mademoiselle Aurélie; but, me, I did not promise anything and
I have nothing to hold.

--But, unhappy child, the mere presence of this young man here
implied an acceptance on your part. I am the ticket creator,
but you are the endorser. Besides, think of Hector's despair; do you want
ruin his life?

"Do you believe he loves me, my father?"

--If he loves you! ha! if you knew what tone he was saying to me, there is no
more than an hour: "Mademoiselle Aurélie, I love her like a sister."

The girl couldn't suppress a burst of laughter.

--Do you think that's enough? she asked.

"I swear to you," replied M. Blandureau, "I swear to you that I did not like
not your mother at all when we got married. God knows though
if we were happy!

"Well, me," resumed Mademoiselle Aurélie, "at no price, my father, I
don't want this happiness. I'm not young girls that we
forced," she added defiantly.

"And I," cried M. Blandureau furiously, "I swear that the earth will cease to
turn and the sun to light up the earth before they see me resume
my word.

And he went out, pulling the door violently.

Mademoiselle Aurélie was not of a character to be frightened at if
little. She never gave up her hopes.

An hour later, Hector received a little note from her in which,
invoking the delicacy of a gallant man, she conjured him to
remove. Besides, she gave him no details.

But Hector could not thus yield lightly to the desires of
Miss Aurelie. He wanted to see her first, talk to her.

And when time was running out, he jumped in a car and had himself driven
in Ville-d'Avray.

It had been about a fortnight since Hector had seen Mademoiselle
Blandureau; he barely recognized her, so much had transfigured her love
true that she felt. It was still the statue, but the animated statue
by the spark.

It was with modest blushes that she very simply told him her
novel.

If she had written to Hector, it was because she was sure of M.
Wellesley.

Hector was truly touched by the expression of anguish that appeared on
the features of the young girl, when in closing she renewed her
pray.

"I will obey you, Mademoiselle," he said to her, hoping that at
lack of love that I did not know how to deserve, this deference will earn me
your friendship.

Under any other circumstances, Hector would have been singularly disturbed
to have to face Mr. Blandureau's anger; but he was so happy
that he hardly thought of it.

The former merchant, to tell the truth, received him rather badly.

Delighted with this rupture, he made it a point of honor to appear indignant. He did
representations to Hector, offered to close the door to M.
Wellesley, proposed to him to increase the figure of the dowry, and when he
saw the immovable young man, he overwhelmed him with the most
harsh and reproached him for his lack of faith.

"Your father would not have acted thus," he said to her; but finally, since
you absolutely refuse to accept my daughter, because it is you who refuses,
I hope so, and without reasons, you are going to sign a declaration to me.

Hector signed heartily, and taking leave of M. Blandureau, he
ran to the nearest cafe and wrote to Ferdinand:

"Everything is arranged. Come on, I'm waiting for you."

That same evening, Mr. Blandureau approved Mr. James Wellesley's request.
He even took advantage of the change of son-in-law to reduce the dowry by five
hundred thousand francs.

Only then did the baronet learn that his father-in-law had been in the
trade. His prejudices wanted to raise their voices. He silenced them.
He consoled himself with this reflection:

--Who will know in England?

Two days later, Hector was finishing his toilet when the servant
from the hotel told him that a gentleman insisted on speaking to him.

"Let him come in," said Hector, sure it must be Ferdinand, and he
came forward to meet his friend.

It was not Ferdinand, but Sir James, paler and graver.
than usual. He held in his hand a mahogany box which he placed on
Table.

"I have to speak to you seriously," he said to Hector, "are you sure
that no one can hear us?

"Nobody," replied Hector, surprised at this start.

The Englishman went to make sure the door was securely closed, and returning
to his friend:

"Monsieur," he said to him, "I am an utterly guilty man, and quite
unworthy of your friendship. I despise myself and you wouldn't know
overwhelm me with more reproaches than my conscience has given me.
I had a fiancée, I betrayed her; yesterday I had to write to him that
I was a man without faith; today I come to tell you: Friend, I
betrayed in the most miserable way, I took away your heart from
the one you were to marry, I love Aurélie, I am loved by her. his father
has just given me his hand.

"You are the best and most excellent of men," cried Hector,
hugging the gentleman to his heart. If you ever need a sure friend,
come to me. Do you need all my fortune, speak?

Mr. Wellesley thought Hector's reason was lost, and his remorse
redoubled.

"Come back to yourself," he said to her, "I haven't told you everything yet. I want
to offer you all the satisfactions a man could desire. I have
a box of pistols; only one of these guns is loaded. You go
choose and...

--Fight with you! cried Hector, and why, great God!
Rest assured; I didn't like Mademoiselle Aurélie.

"Whether you like it or not," resumed Sir James, "my action is none the less
less perfidious, nor less odious. But, I repeat it to you, I have there
guns...

"You are mad," said Hector, shrugging his shoulders. How, you
take Mademoiselle Aurélie, and you want to kill me over
market!

Mr. Wellesley grew angry at these last words.

"It is too late to retreat," said he; I apologized to you
such that henceforth I could not endure the sight of you. You refuse the
reparation that I came to offer you; it's me now who you
demands satisfaction.

A duel would certainly have ended this singular quarrel, if
the arrival of Ferdinand had come to put an end to it.

He had received Hector's letter and was running.

As soon as he was made aware of the matter:

"Leave me," he said to Hector, "I who speak English like a Londoner,
I'll settle the matter with Mr. Wellesley.

He was good at straightening things out, Ferdinand.

After Hector passed into another room, he told Sir James
the story of his friend and Mademoiselle d'Ambleçay.

The Englishman's fury knew no bounds.

--I am played! he cried; and then he demanded reparations from a
a voice so imperious and so high that Hector ran up at the noise.

They explained each other, and the next day Hector gratified Sir James with a nice
sword in the arm, which delayed his marriage for six weeks.

These few drops of blood retempered the friendship of these enemies with a
day.




XI


Ferdinand was a hundred times prouder than a Roman triumphant, in the evening
where, after three weeks of absence, he entered La Fresnaie,
followed by his friend Hector.

Travelers were expected. The house had that festive air that betrays
outside the joy of those who live there. Kept up to date, by his
husband, of all that was happening in Paris, Madame Aubanel had spared
Hector the sweetest of surprises. By dint of eloquence, she had
persuaded Madame d'Ambleçay to come and dine at La Fresnaie with her daughter. The
baroness had tried to resist, but what good reasons
could she give? Sir James had officially notified him of the
breakup, and she had replied to give him back his word.

It was therefore Louise that the first Hector saw when he entered the
living room, and the look that the two lovers exchanged was like a long
poem, which spoke of their past anguish and their present happiness.

Hector was far from expecting such happiness; he had dreaded
new barriers; so he was obliged, in order not to fall, to
to seek a point of support on the arm of his friend, while he
bowed respectfully before the baroness.

"If I dare to reappear before you, madam," he said to her in a voice
trembling with emotion, is that I have fulfilled the conditions that you
you thought you had to impose on me.

And he gave her a letter.

This letter was the one in which M. and Madame Blandureau had the honor
to inform their friends and acquaintances of Mademoiselle's wedding
Aurélie Blandureau, their daughter, with Sir James Wellesley.

If there was "sir" and not "my lord," it was not the fault of
the former trader; he had had a discussion on this subject of more than
two hours with the baronet.

Madame d'Ambleçay quickly skimmed through this letter, which did not tell her
nothing new, and addressing his daughter:

--Well! my poor child, she said in a tone of false sadness,
here is Mr. Wellesley abandoning you for another.

For more than a fortnight already Mademoiselle Louise had been delighted to
this blessed betrayal, she nevertheless made every effort to
to appear surprised: she even tried,--see the perfidy,--a little
sad pout. But she was ill practiced in dissimulation, and her
eyes shining with joy gave a striking denial to his vexed look.

"And when will Mr. Wellesley marry?" asked the Baroness of Hector.

"The third of next May," replied Ferdinand, "thanks to my
diplomacy which hastened the marriage.

--Well! resumed Madame d'Ambleçay, "I believe we can do our
preparations for this time.

And, taking her daughter's hand, she put it in Hector's hand.

* * * * *

Mr. and Mrs. Hector Malestrat are now settled in Touraine. They
live in the Château d'Ambleçay while waiting for the pretty
house which they are having built a league from La Fresnaie.

Hector never returned to Bordeaux, and if you open the _Petites
Posters,_ you will probably read there:

FOR SALE, in one of the prettiest districts of Bordeaux, the hotel
Malestrat, completely refurbished and beautifully decorated.

Mademoiselle Aurélie, now Madame Wellesley, reigns at
Follingham-Castle, her husband's mansion in Lincolnshire.

Her maiden name having been uttered by chance in front of a few
neighborhood chatelaines, she did not hesitate to make them hear
that the Blandureaus are allied to the first families of France.

Madame Wellesley, adored by a husband she loves, is moreover so
happy that she doesn't even dream of wishing the death of this uncle who
must bequeath to her the title of lady.

Neither Hector nor Sir James, if they have children, will stop
their establishment twenty years in advance, they know too well what
cost.

--The promises of marriage made by the parents, says M. Blandureau,
are bills of exchange drawn on the future, the most inaccurate of all
the debtors.

And chance is and will always remain the first of the negotiators in
weddings.

END




TABLE

I

MJD DE SAINT-ROCH, matrimonial ambassador 1

II

MARRIAGE PROMISES 175

Paris.--Printing of E. Donnaud, rue Cassette, 9.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventure Weddings, by Émile Gaboriau

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURE WEDDINGS ***

***** This file should be named 46253-8.txt or 46253-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/2/5/46253/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
